About the publication {#chap.about}
=====================

> Information wants to be free. Information also wants to be expensive.
> Information wants to be free because it has become so cheap to
> distribute, copy, and recombine — too cheap to meter. It wants to be
> expensive because it can be immeasurably valuable to the recipient.
> That tension will not go away. It leads to endless wrenching debate
> about price, copyright, “intellectual property”, the moral rightness
> of casual distribution, because each round of new devices makes the
> tension worse, not better. zufuizf
>
> —  Stewart Brand The Media Lab - Inventing the Future at M.I.T.

The tension underlying the value of information translates into two
predominant software paradigms: Free and Open Source Software (FOSS) and
proprietary software. The criteria for differentiation are based on
control over the software/information. With proprietary software,
control tends to lie more with the vendor, while with Free and Open
Source Software, it tends to be more weighted towards the end user. But
even though the paradigms differ, they use the same copyright laws to
reach and enforce their goals. From a legal perspective, Free and Open
Source Software can be considered as software to which users generally
receive more rights via their license agreement than they would have
with a proprietary software license, yet the underlying license
mechanisms are the same.

However, as legal systems differ throughout the world there are
significant differences in how Free and Open Source Software licenses
are treated in different countries, and it can be difficult to obtain
reliable information on national interpretations. The IFOSS Law Book
engages with this issue by providing a clear yet thorough analysis of
Free and Open Source legal matters by national legal experts. The first
edition covered thirteen countries. This second edition adds four more
countries, bringing the number to seventeen and new editions will expand
over time to explore more. The purpose of the IFOSS Law Book is to
provide a clear, compelling and simple way for legal professionals,
students and academics, and broader policy makers, to contextualize the
ramifications and imperatives of the field in their own nation, and in
the nations of others. This lofty goal is supported by necessity; the
very nature of Free and Open Source Software assumes collaboration to
drive value, and such collaboration is by the nature of the Internet not
confined to national borders, yet it is simultaneously defined in legal
terms by their differing systems, laws and interpretations of best
practice in the management of creative goods.

The IFOSS Law Book does not endeavour to be the sole required reference
for legal aspects of Free and Open Source Software. Rather, it is
intended to become the place where legal experts confronted with a legal
question under a foreign jurisdiction can turn for an understanding on
how Free and Open Source Licenses are treated under that law. From this
starting point, experts can seek specific information or seek the advice
of a local legal counsel. In short, the IFOSS Law Book is positioned as
a bench mark reference that helps people quickly contextualize the key
issues in the field.

Finally, it is important to point out that the IFOSS Law Book is not
written for those who endorse FOSS for ideological or practical reasons.
The publication is targeted towards all those that encounter FOSS in
their profession.

Free Software or Open Source Software {#sec.foss}
-------------------------------------

The Free Software and the Open Source Software movements largely pursue
similar goals and endorse similar software licences. But historically,
both movements carry different emphases. Where the “Free Software”
movement focuses on the rights (the four freedoms) which Free Software
provides to its users, the “Open Source Software” movement points to its
Open Source Definition and the advantages of peer-to-peer software
development. The IFOSS Law Book does not endorse any emphasis. It uses
the term Free and Open Source Software (FOSS) to cover both Free
Software and Open Source Software.

FOSS licences {#sec.licences}
-------------

The goals of FOSS are realised through licences governed by copyright
law. These licences tend to take an unusual form compared to traditional
proprietary documents. Instead of providing a narrow grant of use with a
long list of exceptions and restrictions, FOSS licences provide a broad
grant of use with few restrictions. These licences are often divided
into three categories: non-Copyleft, weak-Copyleft and strong-Copyleft.
It is the analysis of these licenses under local copyright law by local
legal experts that lies at the heart of the IFOSS Law Book.

Working method {#sec.method}
--------------

This law book is a product of its time. Its management is distributed
across three countries and two continents, while its contributors are
linked through technology as much — if not more — than their formal
legal positions and firms. The two threads underlying the organization
of the publication are that the book itself will provide a neutral and
lasting reference, while the local chapters will be developed in a
flexible enough manner to accurately reflect the state of the art
regarding interpretation for the nation in question. As such the book
actually has two forms; an “evolving” form based at
<http://www.ifosslawbook.org/> that sees each chapter continually
refined and provides a mechanism for any reader to contribute notes and
clarifications as necessary, and a “complete” form that is physically
published through Open Source Press, Germany.

Like any work of reference, this book is intended to be accurate and
trustworthy, and it employs several methods to deliver the highest level
of fidelity in this regard. The first and foremost is the careful
selection of chapter authors. All of the initial authors are
experienced, driven professionals sourced from the European Legal
Network, the largest network of its kind, and the primary global
resource for Free and Open Source Software legal knowledge as of 2014.
The second method is to openly and continuously invite the broader
network to review, comment and improve the chapter texts, positioning
the publication in clear terms as an open reference intended to benefit
all. The third and by no means least important method is to ensure that
third party experts — be they legal professionals, technical experts or
from another field altogether — can easily register and provide feedback
on chapters and the book itself through the main website.

The governance of the IFOSS Law Book is currently limited to a handful
of parties. As the publication progresses, it will develop a formal
governance structure based on maintaining objective analysis, improving
its potential for sustainability and ensuring fair representation for
diverse legal and social systems. This governance will be drawn from
existing contributors, the network from which they originate and from
the example set by other publications in this field. As with all other
aspects of this publication, contributions towards its development is
welcomed from all interested parties.

The IFOSS Law Book currently provides three forms of information for
each country covered:

-   An introduction to software protection (in general) in the nation

-   A general analysis of FOSS under local legislation

-   A overview of local FOSS cases (if any)

The second edition is edited by Ywein Van den Brande, Shane Coughlan and
Till Jaeger.

License {#sec.booklicense}
-------

The IFOSS Law Book as a whole is published under a CC-BY-ND license. The
text can be freely copied and shared by any party under these
conditions. Physical copies may be purchased, but it is also available
at no cost in electronic form at our website.

Conclusion {#sec.conclusion}
----------

FOSS is no longer a new, challenging and unproven method regulating the
creation, use and redistribution of creative goods for digital purposes.
In the past twenty five years it has matured into an accepted, proven
and compelling proposition for commercial and non-commercial entities
alike, delivering value in terms of both productivity and economic
activity. As it has matured, so too has the legal understanding
regarding its use on a nation by nation basis. The first edition of the
IFOSS Law Book contributed hereto with a comprehensive overview of the
understanding of FOSS under the legislation of thirteen countries.

It is with this in view that the editors present this second edition of
the International Free and Open Source Software Law Book (IFOSS Law
Book) that covers four more countries. We hope and expect that it will
provide a useful and trusted source for users and advisors seeking
information on Free and Open Source Software issues under foreign
legislations.

Enjoy the book.

Ywein Van den Brande — Shane Coughlan — Till Jaeger

July 2014

A history of FOSS law and licensing {#chap.history}
===================================

author:\[Engelfriet,Arnoud\]

Surprisingly, programmable computers are older than copyright law:
Charles Babbage’s analytical engine of 1837 predates the Berne
Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works (1886).
However, unlike the Convention, Babbage’s mechanical contraption
designed to perform mathematical calculations never became a real-world
success. Several special-purpose machines, such as the Hollerith
tabulating machine, did sell on the market in the late 19th and early
20th century. The first computers in the modern sense only became
available in the 1950s, thanks to ground-breaking research by John von
Neumann and Alan Turing in particular.

Companies such as IBM that provided these computers as part of what we
today would call “solutions”: businesses were provided with
specially-programmed computers to support certain business activities.
Customers would pay for continued support and new programs as part of
the deal, but no one would consider buying or selling computer programs
by themselves.[^1] Users would get together to share their in-house
software developments with others, eventually leading to the building of
pools of software. This was actually encouraged by most vendors, as it
stimulated the sale of hardware that could use this software. One might
thus say that the idea of free and open source is as old as the
computing business itself.[^2]

Age of the shrink-wrap {#intro_shrinkwrap}
----------------------

New developments in computing power over the next decade caused a
fundamental shift away from this model. A landmark event occurred in
1969 when IBM unbundled its hardware and software activities,
effectively giving birth to the software industry as such.[^3] A further
stimulus for this market came from the personal computer, a low-cost
alternative to the “big iron” mainframe computers that were mainly in
use at the time. In the early 1970s, several do-it-yourself kits became
available that allowed hobbyists to build their own personal computers,
and in 1977 the Commodore PET and the Apple II appeared on the market as
the first ready-to-use computers.[^4] With hardware and software
products separated, software as such was ready to develop as a market.
But many software vendors were concerned about the viability of this
market, as it was unclear which legal protection they would receive.

Debate among lawmakers and lobbyists led to various proposals, ranging
from copyright and patent law to a *sui generis* right specifically
designed to protect software. After much debate, a consensus emerged
that copyright would be the most appropriate legal means.[^5] The USA
was the first to adopt copyright protection for software.[^6] The
European Economic Community followed in 1991 with its Software
Directive,[^7] which was largely based on the US law but with more
liberal provisions on reverse engineering. With copyright protection
firmly in place, software vendors were able to sell their software “as a
book” (to quote from the Borland software licenses) by charging
royalties for each copy sold.[^8] This created a large market for
software, sometimes called the “Age of the Shrink-wrap” because of the
way that software was made available: in large, shrink-wrapped boxes.

Software distributors did something peculiar in this market: while
software was offered “as a book”, they did not actually sell the
software. They included long legal documents that solemnly declared that
the software was merely licensed and that the user had no rights other
than as provided in this license. The legal validity of these licenses
has been hotly disputed but today seems to be grudgingly accepted in the
general case.[^9] Two areas of particular attention in these licenses
are the restriction of statutory rights, such as the right to reverse
engineer the software, and the disclaimer of all warranties and
liabilities.

The right to reverse engineer is a peculiar one. As a general rule,
buyers of a product are expected and permitted to examine what they buy
and to discover how it works. Copyright (or patent) law may restrict the
building and selling of cloned products, but the investigation itself is
not restricted. For software, these licenses would put this expectation
on its head. No one was permitted to discover how the licensed software
works — not even if a compatibility issue or a serious bug arose. This
gave the licensor a very comfortable position, as he could now charge
maintenance fees for any and all work to be done on the software.
Legislators did try to introduce at least some right to reverse engineer
software for compatibility purposes, but these clauses are generally
regarded as weak and risky to invoke.[^10]

Free software and the GPL {#foss_and_gpl}
-------------------------

As soon as software by itself started to become a viable market, access
to software in its human-readable source code form was becoming more and
more difficult. Software companies regarded their source code a
treasured business secret (in today’s terms: their intellectual
property) and severely restricted its access and distribution to third
parties. For famous MIT hacker Richard M. Stallman, this “hoarding” of
software was simply unacceptable. Software should be freely available to
all, and its programmers should not be able to set legal or other
restrictions on other people’s use of the code.[^11] In 1983, Stallman
quit MIT and founded what would become the Free Software Foundation
(FSF), an organisation dedicated to creating and stimulating software
that would be freely available to all.

To help achieve this goal Stallman drafted the *GNU General Public
License* or GPL, a software license that allows anyone to freely use,
distribute and adapt the licensed software at no charge. The only
restriction he added was that any adapted or extended version of the
software could only be distributed under the GPL as well. This ensured
the continued availability of the source code to anyone who came in
contact with the software. With this license, he turned copyright on its
head — an early name for the model is *copyleft*.

Fifteen years later, Stallman’s work was shown to be a resounding
success. Almost single-handedly he had written most of the software
needed to program and use a general-purpose computer. Only one
significant part was missing: the *kernel*, the key part of a computer
operating system that controls all software and interfaces with the
underlying hardware. Operating systems are expensive and difficult to
develop, but in 1991 a Finnish second-year computer science student
announced he was going to create one as “just a hobby, won’t be big and
professional”. His creation *Linux* (mixing his first name Linus and
Unix according to hacker tradition) would become one of the most
valuable pieces of software ever written. Torvalds chose to use the GPL,
calling it “one of the very best design decisions” he ever made.[^12]

Legal entanglements around BSD {#legal_entanglements}
------------------------------

If not for a legal battle around free software elsewhere, Linux might
not have been. The Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD) was a collection
of extensions, patches and add-ons to the Bell Labs Unix operating
system created at Berkeley University. Based on the principles of free
and open source software, the BSD had already been available since about
1978. Over the years, BSD morphed into a complete operating system,
culminating in the so-called Networking Release 2 in June 1991. All code
was available under the BSD license, allowing anyone to use it provided
credit was given to the original authors.

AT&T, owners of the Unix copyrights at the time, felt that this release
infringed on its copyrights and filed a lawsuit against the
university.[^13] In a counterclaim, Berkeley alleged that AT&T had used
BSD code without adhering to its license, as credits and copyright
notices had been removed.[^14] The suit dragged on until a settlement
was obtained in 1994. By that time however the development of BSD had
slowed down significantly, allowing Linux to gain developer attention.
Torvalds has observed he would not have created Linux if the BSD
operating system had been available to him at the time.[^15]

The rise of open source {#rise_of_oss}
-----------------------

With the Linux kernel available, the free software movement finally was
in a position to make significant growth and maybe overtake the
“proprietary” world. However, it only had limited success. Over the
years, the FSF had developed a rather confrontational attitude towards
companies that did not subscribe to its ideas, which made companies
hesitant to adopt free software.[^16] A related complication was that
the GPL was often misunderstood by lawyers, creating a false belief that
using any piece of GPL software in one’s product would require the
“freeing” of the entire software stack.

In 1998 Netscape Communications announced that it would release the
source code of its Web browser. This spurred a group of prominent free
software developers to promote free software principles under the
newly-coined term “open source”: collaboration between programmers
world-wide who jointly improve software in a way that no individual
company could achieve.[^17] The Open Source Initiative (OSI) was
subsequently founded as a public benefit corporation, which amongst
other things offers a certification program for open source software
licenses.[^18] Their trademark application on the term “open source” was
refused. Certified licenses now wear the label “OSI Certified Open
Source”.

The choice for the term “open source” has not been well received by the
free software community. The main point of criticism is that “free
software” focuses on freedoms for all users, while “open source” waters
down the focus to just community-driven development.[^19] In recent
years the term *free and open source software* or FOSS has arisen as a
neutral alternative, a practice which this law book also adheres to. A
lesser-used variant is *free/libre/open source software* (FLOSS), which
uses “libre” to clarify the meaning of free as in “freedom” rather than
as in “at no charge”.

Legal validity {#legal_validity}
--------------

There are hundreds of FOSS licenses, although they can be grouped
roughly into three categories. The first category is often referred to
as the *academic licenses*, which basically require that credit be given
and the authors are shielded from warranty claims. The second category
provides *copyleft* — the requirement that source code be made available
to users, including derivative works. The third category is somewhat of
a compromise: *weak copyleft* requires that source code of the software
itself (and modifications to it) are shared but larger works may be kept
proprietary. Most FOSS today is licensed under the GPL, the canonical
copyleft license.[^20] The BSD license is the most popular academic
license. Netscape used the weak-copyleft Mozilla Public License when
releasing its browser in 1998.

Much has been written about the legal validity of FOSS licenses in
various jurisdictions.[^21] Legal debate focuses mostly on the copyleft
provisions: what is the scope of a “derivative work” and how far can a
license extend the obligation of relicensing under a copyleft license?
Other legal areas of contention are the limitations of liability and the
interpretation of rights and obligations under international law.
However, the number of lawsuits worldwide challenging these licenses can
be counted on the fingers of two hands. The aforementioned lawsuit
around BSD may well be regarded as the first, at least in spirit.

In 2002, it looked like the GPL would have its day in court when the
GPL-licensed MySQL database became subject of a lawsuit between owner
MySQL AB and the US software company Progress.[^22] Progress had
allegedly created a derivative work of MySQL by adding support for its
own database format. However, after MySQL obtained a preliminary
injunction, the parties settled before the question could be addressed
by the court.

The Software Freedom Law Center has filed several lawsuits against
misappropriation of GPL code. Several cases have been filed focusing on
Busybox, starting with *BusyBox vs Monsoon* in 2007.[^23] However, all
cases so far have been settled out of court. Few others have brought
cases. Two notable examples are *SCO vs. IBM* and *Wallace vs. FSF*. The
less said about those legal disasters the better.[^24]

An important milestone was the 2008 JMRI lawsuit, focusing on model
rail-road train software licensed under the little-used “Artistic
License”. In a much-welcomed ruling, the US Federal appeal court ruled
that the principle of open source licensing was a valuable goal that
copyright law ought to support.[^25] In addition, the court held that
the source code sharing obligations were limitations of the copyright
license and not mere covenants to the license. This distinction is
important, as violating a license limitation allows the full force of
copyright law to be used against the licensee. A mere covenant has to be
addressed as a contract breach.[^26]

In Germany, Linux kernel hacker Harald Welte did manage to achieve
several legal successes against companies using his GPL-licensed
netfilter software. Notably, Welte obtained injunctions against D-Link,
Fortinet and SMC (Skype).[^27] Subsequently, German courts had little
trouble accepting the GPL as a legally binding license agreement and
enjoining those who did not adhere to its terms.[^28] Welte founded the
*GPL-violations.org* project in January 2004 to raise public awareness
of the infringing use of free software.[^29] The project has reported
numerous successful settlements and a 100% success rate in enforcing its
licenses.

Towards the future {#towards_future}
------------------

FOSS shows no sign of slowing down. Linux is widely in use in embedded
environments (mobile phones, televisions, cars, robots) and the open
source Firefox web browser is the most popular alternative to
Microsoft’s Internet Explorer. Most of the infrastructure of the
Internet runs on open source software.

Licensing-wise, FOSS is here to stay. There is consensus that the
principles of FOSS are legally sound. FOSS licensing is also being
recognized as valuable by policymakers. Lawsuits in the coming years may
address some of the open issues, such as the scope of derivative works
and liability for FOSS developers. More is to be expected from voluntary
compliance and a growing maturity in how the legal community approaches
FOSS licensing principles. We have come a long way already.

Belgium {#chap.belgium}
=======

author:\[Van den Brande,Ywein\]

Introduction to software protection under Belgian law {#sec_introductionbelgium}
-----------------------------------------------------

### Body of law {#sec_bodybelgium}

Copyright protection of software is regulated in Belgium under the
Software Act of 30 June 1994[^30]. This law transposes the Council
Directive of 14 May 1991 on the Legal Protection of computer programs
(91/250/EEC) into Belgian national law (hereinafter referred to as the
“Software Directive”)[^31]. The Software Act is the lex specialis with
respect to the general Belgian Copyright Act as lex generalis[^32]. This
means that the general Copyright Act will apply to software, to the
extent that the Software Act does not contain any specific provisions.

### Software Act: Object of protection {#sec_protectionbelgium}

Computer programs (including the preparatory material[^33]) are
protected by copyright and are equivalent to literary works within the
meaning of the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and
Artistic Works[^34]. According to article 2 of the Software Act only
original computer programs benefit copyright protection. Computer
programs that are not original don’t benefit copyright protection. The
ideas and principles behind computer programs or technical interfaces
are explicitly denied copyright protection[^35].

The originality requirement means that the computer program needs to be
an own intellectual creation of the author. No other criteria may be
used to determine whether the program can be subject to copyright
protection[^36]. There is no legal definition of the originality
requirement. Legal doctrine established that the amount of work involved
is not relevant. A computer program is only deemed to be the own
intellectual creation of the author if the personal stamp of the author
is visible in the work. Therefore it is required, but not sufficient,
that the author has freedom of choice when he creates his work. If the
author has no choice but following a path that leads to one single
outcome, no originality is involved. Thus, merely registering or copying
the reality or executing a functional routine is not considered to be an
original intellectual activity in the sense of the Copyright Act[^37].
Where Belgian legal doctrine stresses the need that the personal
contribution of the author must be sufficiently intensive (“Le droit
d’auteur ne devrait s’appliquer qu'à des créations qui révèlent un
niveau d’inventivité personnelle d’une certain intensité”[^38]), they
agree that the threshold as applied by the courts is fairly low[^39].

### Authors/Beneficiaries {#sec_authorsbelgium}

The general Copyright Act provides that the copyrights on a work belong
to the author, whether the author is an employee or not[^40]. Article 3
of the Software Act however, provides that where computer programs are
created by one or more employees or functionaries in the execution of
their duties or following the instructions given by their employer, the
employer will be deemed to be the right-holder of the economic rights in
the computer programs so created, unless expressly provided
otherwise[^41].

Article 2.3 of the Software Directive provides that “the employer
exclusively shall be entitled to exercise all economic rights”. The
wording “entitled to exercise” creates a certain ambiguity: is the
employer the owner of the economic rights or merely the mandatory of his
employees? Case law confirmed that the Belgian lawmaker has chosen for
the first interpretation[^42].

### Exclusive rights {#sec_exclusivebelgium}

According to article 5 of the Software Act the economic rights comprise
the exclusive right of (a) the permanent or temporary reproduction of a
computer program by any means and in any form, in part or in whole, (b)
translation, adaptation, arrangement or alteration of a computer
program, and (c) distribution of the computer program, including the
rental and lending, of the original computer program or copies thereof
to the public. This is a slight diversion of the Software Directive, as
article 4(c) of the Software Directive only mentions the rental of
computer programs.

### Exceptions to exclusive rights {#sec_exceptionsbelgium}

Article 5(c) of the law expressly provides that the first sale in the
European Community of a copy of a program by the rightholder or with his
consent shall exhaust the distribution right of that copy within the
Community, with the exception of the right to control further rental of
the program or a copy thereof.

The other exceptions are set forth in article 6 of the Software Act:

\(1) In the absence of specific contractual provisions, no authorization
by the rightholder is required for acts necessary for the use of the
computer program by the lawful acquirer in accordance with its intended
purpose, including error correction.

\(2) The reproduction by way of a back-up copy by a person having a right
to use the computer program may not be prevented, insofar as that copy
is necessary to use the program.

\(3) The person having a right to use a copy of a computer program is
entitled, without the authorization of the rightholder, to observe,
study or test the functioning of the program in order to determine the
ideas and principles which underlie any element of the program if he
does so while lawfully performing any of the acts of loading,
displaying, running, transmitting or storing the program.

This article basically restates the three exceptions of article 5 of the
Software Directive.

Article 7 of the law explains in detail in which circumstances no
authorization of the right holder is required to reproduce and/or
translate a computer program in order to obtain the information
necessary to achieve the interoperability of an independently created
computer program with other programs[^43].

The law expressly provides that article 6, section 2 and 3 and article 7
are compulsory law[^44]. Hence, contractual provisions to the contrary
are deemed not to exist.

However, the exercise of these statutory rights is often difficult in
practice because the licensee generally has no access to the source code
of the application and it is not obvious to enforce access legally[^45].

### Moral rights {#sec_moralbelgium}

Article 4 of the Software Act specifies that the moral rights on
software are regulated by article 6bis 1 of the Berner Convention. This
Convention acknowledges a minimum protection, namely the paternity right
and the right to oppose to modifications and applications which might
affect the honor or reputation of the author[^46]. These two rights
remain in force after the transfer of the proprietary rights[^47] and
following the death of the author, at least[^48] until after expiry of
the proprietary rights[^49].

The right of distribution has not been specified in the convention[^50].
Nevertheless, some authors argue that this right also must be recognised
as a moral right on software[^51] as in the absence of a specific
regulation in the Software Act, the general regime[^52] for literary
works needs to be applied.

Moral rights are generally considered to be inalienable. This does not
mean that it is impossible to renounce moral rights[^53]. It means that
the global renouncement of the future exercise of moral rights is void,
also concerning moral rights on software[^54]. However, some authors
wonder whether the principle inalienability of moral rights is desirable
for technological applications such as software[^55].

### Term of protection {#sec_termbelgium}

The same term as for works of literature and art applies: 70 years as of
January 1 following the death of the author[^56]. In case of co-authors,
the protection of the work lasts until 70 years as of January 1
following the death of the longest living author.

### Copyright assignment {#sec_assignmentbelgium}

The law[^57] provides that the copyrights in works (other than software)
made by employees in the course of the execution of their usual tasks
are not automatically transferred to the employer. A written clause
stipulating the transfer in the individual employment contract, the
applicable statute or collective agreement is required. If the transfer
relates to the exploitation of the work in a form that is still unknown,
the employee is entitled to a share in the gain. Article 3 of the
Software Act however, provides that where computer programs are created
by one or more employees or functionaries in the execution of their
duties or following the instructions given by their employer, the
employer will be deemed by law to be the right-holder of the economic
rights in the computer programs so created, unless expressly provided
otherwise in a contract[^58]. The moral rights are not transferred.

The exploitation rights on works can be freely transferred, e.g. in case
of works made for hire. However, contracts on the transfer of copyrights
do have some particularities under Belgian law. First of all, they must
be in writing and be clear. When a clause is unclear, it will be
explained restrictively and to the advantage of the author. The extent
of the transfer (what rights, duration, methods of exploitation and
compensation) needs to be described. Another particularity is that the
assignment of rights in future works is only valid for a limited period
in time[^59]. A transfer of copyrights in future works that is
temporally unlimited is not valid. Therefore under Belgian law, the
wording “for the entire term of copyright protection” is more effective
than “temporally unlimited”. Further it is mandatory to stipulate the
genre of the work that is the subject matter of the transfer[^60]. The
term genre is ambiguous and often leads to confusion. Is it meant to
serve in a peer-to-peer environment, strictly on a mobile device, or
merely as documentation? All these exploitation methods and uses of the
same work may qualify as different genres under Belgian law and should
be named in the agreement. The transfer of rights with respect to still
unknown exploitation methods is void under Belgian law[^61].

In order to control the copyright situation better, it may be useful to
collect all copyrights concerning a FOSS project within one
organisation.

### Special measures {#sec_measuresbelgium}

The Software Act refers to the general Copyright Act regarding the
measures to enforce copyrights. Besides these general measures, a
specific criminal sanction has been created for those who bring into
trade or possess for commercial purposes a copy of a computer program,
of which they know or can reasonably presume that it concerns an
unlawful copy, as well as for those who bring into trade or possess for
commercial purposes tools which are exclusively aimed at facilitating
the unlawful removal or avoidance of technical means which protect the
computer program[^62].

Unprotected software and public domain software {#sec_publicdomainbelgium}
-----------------------------------------------

As set forth above, only software that is original in the sense that it
is an intellectual creation of the author benefits copyright protection.
Non-original software does not come into consideration for copyright
protection and can, in principle, be used freely[^63].

Under Belgian law, public domain software is considered as software to
which the author has given up all rights and on which nobody is able to
enforce any rights. This software can be used, reproduced or executed
freely, without permission or the payment of a fee[^64]. Public domain
software can in certain cases even be presented by third parties as own
work, and by modifying the original work, third parties can take certain
versions of the public domain software out of the public domain
again[^65].

Legal theory states that the author of FOSS, contrary to the author of
public domain software, has in no way whatsoever given up his rights on
his work[^66]. FOSS supports on the rights of the author (the copyright)
to impose FOSS license conditions[^67]. Under Belgian law, FOSS is
considered as software to which users generally receive more rights via
their license agreement, than they would normally have with a
proprietary software license[^68]. However, the FOSS license conditions
need to be respected by the user.

Analysis of FOSS under Belgian law {#sec_analysisbelgium}
----------------------------------

The FOSS license deviates so much from conventional license agreements
that under Belgian law it needs to be considered as a sui generis
license agreement[^69]. However, it is still based on the same
mechanisms.

### Copyrights {#sec_copyrightsbelgium}

Although FOSS can be written by one person or be owned by one legal
entity[^70], generally speaking, after some time the software is the
result of the work of several authors who can make claims to it. The
question is whether later additions create a collaborative work (a work
created by collaborating authors), or whether the original software is
the end work and every contribution created during the further
development of the software, a derivative work. The legal consequences
are different.

### Qualification of FOSS {#sec_qualificationbelgium}

For it to be work that was created following collaboration it is not
necessary for every co-author to have contributed equally[^71]. In the
case of FOSS this is rarely the case. Nor is it required that the
co-authors worked on it at the same time. In most cases this will not be
the case. However, to be a co-author, the contribution needs to be
copyright protected. The provider of an idea is not a co-author, nor the
person who corrects a technical error or merely follows
instructions[^72].

It is also necessary that the work was made by two or more people who
created the software in consultation, from the same mind. Prof.
Berenboom[^73] summarises it as follows: *The thing that characterises a
co-author is the intimate entanglement ('intimité*) of his contribution
with the contributions of other authors, which is expressed by the
indispensable character in the entire work: without this contribution
the work would certainly not have seen the light of day, and it would
have been different.'

Whereas the first version of the software, if written by several people,
can in many cases be qualified as a work created following a
collaboration, this seems much less the case for the later versions,
which are based on the original work, without, however, there being any
“consultation” between the authors. These later versions will be
qualified as derivative works. Therefore, in terms of the legal
consequences, a distinction needs to be made between the rights of the
original co-authors and the rights of people who carry on based on the
original work.

#### Rights of the original co-authors {#sec_cooauthorsbelgium}

Unless the components of the software can be clearly distinguished, it
usually concerns “indivisible works”[^74]. This concerns work whereby it
cannot be concluded clearly what the individual contribution of every
author is, e.g. when two authors write a text together.

In the case of indivisible works the authors are free to regulate the
exercise of the copyrights by agreement. This freedom goes very
far[^75]. The co-authors can agree how the program is made public (e.g.
as “FOSS”) and how decisions regarding the copyrights are made, e.g. by
normal or special majorities, or give one of them the right to make all
decisions regarding this work[^76]. They can also reach all kinds of
agreements relating to the moral rights[^77], such as under whose name
the work will be published.

If the co-authors have not reached an agreement, neither of the authors
is allowed to exercise the copyright separately. Unanimity is required.
In the absence of unanimity the court decides. The court will decide
equitably and according to custom. The court will take into account good
faith[^78] and apply it to the (verbal) agreement which in fact
constituted the basis for the collaboration and the production of the
software. You don’t work together accidentally.

Belgian law stipulates one exception. Every author has the right to, in
his name and without intervention of the other authors, institute legal
proceedings for an infringement of copyright and demand damages for his
part[^79]. This right also implies the right to stop an
infringement[^80]. However, in some cases the lack of unanimity may
result in the inadmissibility of this claim, e.g. if heirs of a
programmer are unable to agree as to whether to institute a claim[^81].

#### Authors of derivative works {#sec_derivsbelgium}

After some time FOSS will, in most cases, be a derivative work or a
composed work. Derivative works and composed works are works the
originality of which is supported on existing work(s), of which original
characteristics are copied[^82].

The author(s) of the derivative or composed work are the only persons
with a copyright on their work. This is an independent and full
copyright, which is restricted, however, because the derivative or
composed work cannot be operated without the consent of the holder of
the copyright on the original work. For usual FOSS licenses this consent
is not a problem, subject to respecting the terms and conditions (e.g.
regarding further distribution of the derivative work)[^83]. Both
authors can enforce their own copyrights in court.

#### The assignment of copyrights {#sec_assignmentbelgium2}

In order to control the copyright situation better, it may be useful to
collect all copyrights concerning a FOSS project within one
organisation. The existence of this organisation will simplify the
management and enforcing of the joint rights[^84]. The collective
management of copyrights is perfectly possible under Belgian law, and is
usually, but not necessarily, regulated by the fiduciary transfer of
copyrights. The fiduciary transfer means that the party to whom the
copyrights are assigned shall not act for himself but on account of
others who have transferred the rights (the original authors)[^85].

### Moral copyrights {#sec_moralcrbelgium}

FOSS originated in the United States, and therefore attaches less
importance to the moral rights of the author[^86]. The Open Source
Definition specifies that the author of software distributed under a
FOSS license cannot oppose the use of the software by certain people and
groups[^87] or for certain areas of application[^88].

Whether an author is able to give up all his rights on a work is a
difficult question under Belgian law in view of the principal
indefeasibility of the moral rights[^89]. Although renouncement of moral
rights is possible in principle[^90], the global renouncement of the
future exercise of moral rights is void, also concerning moral rights on
software[^91].

The author of a work distributed under the FOSS license shall therefore
probably be able to oppose any use of his work by people or groups or
for certain purposes which affect his honour or reputation, based on his
moral rights.

Moral rights are reflected in derivative works[^92]. The author of the
original work will therefore, based on his moral rights, not only be
able to oppose the use by third parties of his work, but also the use of
derivative works which affect his honour or reputation.

### Enforcing FOSS licenses {#sec_enforcingbelgium}

The question whether a FOSS license can be enforced under the Belgian
legal system depends on whether a valid license was issued. The
essential questions are: (i) between whom is a license reached, and (ii)
has the license been validly reached?

#### Contracting parties {#sec_partiesbelgium}

If one author makes his work available under a FOSS license, the answer
is clear: the license is reached between the licensee and the author. In
case of different co-authors, it becomes more complicated. With whom the
licensee reaches a contract depends on the mutual agreement between the
co-authors.

In most cases FOSS will be the work of several authors who did not work
in joint consultation. After all, FOSS is usually realised via a chain
of authors who all contributed to the realisation of the program. In so
far a new author makes an original contribution to the work, a
derivative work is produced[^93]. The licensee of the eventual work will
need to have the consent of every author in the chain who made an
original contribution to the eventual work, starting with the author of
the first work. This consent can be direct, or indirect by giving
consent in the FOSS license to the next author to modify and distribute
the work.

Most FOSS licenses solve this by creating a contractual bond between the
licensee and all authors in the chain[^94]. GPL version 3, for instance,
contains the following clause: *Each time you convey a covered work, the
recipient automatically receives a license from the original licensors,
to run, modify and propagate that work, subject to this License*[^95]
and GPL version 2: *each time you redistribute the Program (or any work
based on the Program), the recipient automatically receives a license
from the original licensor*[^96].

In this way the user of the software obtains a license of all authors in
the chain. This chain of licenses is valid under Belgian law.

#### Validity of the FOSS licenses {#sec_validitybelgium}

An author chooses a FOSS license because he wants to distribute his work
and make it available to others -possibly with certain restrictions. For
him it is important that he can enforce these restrictions.

Conventional IT agreements are entered into by the explicit acceptance
of the terms and conditions by the licensee following the signing of the
terms and conditions, by opening the packaging, by clicking or selecting
an “I agree” button or by any other action from which acceptance can be
deducted. These methods to reach a licensing agreement have been
sufficiently tried and tested and, at least between commercial parties,
are generally considered to be valid[^97]. FOSS licenses which were
concluded in the same way will be valid.

Typically, in a FOSS environment, however, software is made available
with the simple specification on a website or in the source code of the
software that it concerns FOSS. The license usually does not need to be
explicitly accepted. Having to click and confirm every time could in
some cases interfere with the use of the software. The Open Source
Definition opposes demanding explicit agreement with the license
conditions with the aim of confirming the agreement between licensor and
licensee[^98].

The question is whether in these cases a valid license is entered into.
The answer to this question is affirmative[^99]. The reason is that the
user of a copyright protected work needs to be able to indicate the
grounds on which he is able to use the work. Using the software without
the author’s consent implies a copyright infringement[^100]. This
implies that everyone who wants to use software which they find via the
internet, needs to actively look for a license. If the user cannot prove
he has a license[^101], he must refrain from using it. Renouncement of
copyrights is not suspected but needs to be proven. The mere
availability of a work on the internet does not mean it becomes public
domain. It is doubtful whether a user would benefit from disputing the
existence of a FOSS license. If the user disputes the conclusion of the
FOSS license, this implies no legally valid copyright license was
granted and the user therefore is not allowed to use the software[^102].

However, not all infringements of license agreements are copyright
infringements. An infringement only is a copyright infringement if the
violation affects the exclusive rights of the author protected by
copyright. Violations on clauses that are not based on the exclusive
rights of the author do not consist copyright infringement. Typical
examples hereof are the non-payment of royalties, insufficient
exploitation of the work and the violation of non-competition
obligations[^103]. These consist mere contractual infringements. This
raises the question of the validity of copyleft clauses: is violation of
the copyleft clause automatically a copyright infringement? The answer
is yes, as set forth under nr. 1.3.5.

### Waiver and liability {#sec_waiverbelgium}

Typically, FOSS licenses contain very strong exoneration clauses, which
discharge the author from all liability[^104]. The reason for this is
that FOSS is often made available without a fee, as a result of which
the author generates insufficient income to pay for liability insurances
and legal costs[^105]. Although this reasoning is certainly valid for
the amateur programmer, it applies much less for professional
programmers who built their business model around FOSS[^106].
Professional suppliers of FOSS or related services often provide
guarantees[^107].

One can wonder whether these exoneration clauses comply with the general
validity requirements under Belgian law. These requirements are: (i)
that the clause does not conflict with public order or compulsory law,
(ii) does not cover up personal fraud or an intentional act of the
debtor and (iii) does not take away every significance of the entered
into obligation or the contract[^108]. In this sense it is important to
look at how the licensor presents the product. For a product that is
presented as finished and ready for use, the exoneration clause will be
considered invalid much sooner, than for a product for which the
licensor clearly formulated a reservation[^109].

In so far the three aforementioned conditions have been complied with,
exoneration provisions will be enforceable in principle, unless the
stipulating party could be considered as a professional seller. The
professional seller is deemed to know the defect in the software, and in
pursuance of article 1643 of the Belgian Civil Code, contractual
provisions of non-indemnity for hidden defects have no effect if the
seller knew about the defect at the time of the sale. The professional
seller of FOSS will therefore be liable in principle, unless he can
provide proof of invincible ignorance. In practice this proof will be
hard to provide. The fact that the software was provided for free is no
defence, but it can be part of the proof that the author doesn’t qualify
as a professional seller. However, as also professional sellers provide
software for free, more proof will be needed.

### The copyleft principle {#sec_copyleftbelgium}

#### Principle {#sec_principlebelgium}

A characteristic found in different (but not all[^110]) FOSS licenses is
the so-called “copyleft” principle. FOSS licenses which incorporate the
copyleft principle[^111], lay down by contract that everyone in the
chain of consecutive users, in return for the right of use that is
assigned, needs to distribute the improvements he makes to the software
and the derivative works he makes under the same conditions to other
users, if he chooses to distribute such improvements or derivative
works. In other words, software which incorporates copyleft FOSS, needs
to be distributed in turn as copyleft FOSS. It is not possible to
incorporate copyright protected parts of copyleft software in a
proprietary licensed work.

The copyleft principle can restrict the commercial possibilities of the
software[^112]. Sometimes warnings are issued for the dangers that
companies run if a negligent or vindictive employee were to incorporate
a piece of copyleft code in the code of proprietary software. In theory
this could mean that the company would be obliged to make its
proprietary software available under a copyleft FOSS license. Although
caution is necessary, one can ask oneself whether these worst-case
scenarios are realistic under Belgian law[^113]. The sanction for
incorporating copyleft code in proprietary software will usually be
restricted to a prohibition to distribute the software which is in
breach[^114] or the obligation to remove this piece of code from the
program. If the unlawful use has caused damage to the author, this
damage will need to be reimbursed, but not more than the actually
suffered damage.

#### Validity {#sec_validitybelgium2}

The question relating to the validity of the copyleft clause coincides
with the question whether an author is able to validly lay down how
derivative works need to be distributed. The answer to this question is
affirmative. The author of the original work has no rights on the
derivative work, but based on his rights on the original work is able to
permit or prohibit the distribution of the derivative work. A derivative
work can therefore only be operated subject to the consent of the
copyright owner of the original work. The Visscher and Michaux phrased
this as follows: *L’auteur ou les auteurs de l’oeuvre dérivée sont donc
“pieds et mains liés” vis-à-vis du ou des auteurs de l’oeuvre
première*[^115].

Based on his copyrights an author is entitled to lay down the use of his
work for a particular use, or link certain conditions to it. This right
to determine the destination of a work was recognised in legal
theory[^116] based on an interpretation of article 1 of the old Belgian
Copyright Act of 22 March 1886. As the old article 1 is an almost
literal copy of article 1 of the current Copyright Act, this legal
theory also remains valid under the new Copyright Act[^117]. The right
to determine the destination not only applies inter partes, but erga
omnes[^118], provided that the third parties, in all reasonableness,
should know what the destination is[^119]. The author can therefore lay
down the copyleft condition based on his right to determine the
destination of his work.

Certain authors claim that FOSS doesn’t need the right of destination
for its validity as the author can enforce the FOSS license directly on
his economic copyrights[^120]. Even though there is a certain merit in
this reasoning, one must be cautious. A license infringement does not
automatically imply a copyright infringement as this reasoning seems to
imply. The non-payment of royalties e.g. is not a copyright
infringement, but a “mere” contractual infringement[^121]. The right of
destination is a useful tool to explain why the copyleft clause touches
the exclusive rights of the author[^122]. The right of destination has
its use in explaining the extent of the economical copyrights of the
author. The right of destination is not a new right, but is part of the
economical copyrights set out in article 1 of the Copyright Act[^123].

All rights are subject to abuse, including the copyright. An author can
therefore not randomly exercise his economic and moral rights. A lawful
tangible or moral interest needs to be proven. However, exercising his
copyrights cannot be considered as an abuse of rights as such. Only in
exceptional cases will an author who invokes his copyrights be guilty of
an abuse of rights[^124]. Licensing a work under a copyleft restriction
will in principle not constitute an abuse of right, considering that the
author, in general, will be able to prove a legitimate moral or tangible
interest. A legitimate moral interest could be wanting to keep his work
within the FOSS community, also in a derivative format. Companies which
have constructed a business model around distributing software under
copyleft restrictions will usually be able to prove a legitimate
interest.

However, if an author were to define the license conditions by saying
that the copyleft principle is not only reflected in what is considered
a derivative work in copyright terms, but also in other works, this
could be considered as an abuse of rights in certain cases[^125]. This
could be the case for instance if a license were to lay down that work
which has been stored on the same carrier as the licensed work needs to
be distributed under a FOSS license[^126].

The Software Act specifies: *The first sale in the European Union of a
copy of a program by the copyright owner or with his consent results in
the exhaustion of the right to control the distribution of that copy in
the European Union, with the exception of the right to control the
further leasing and lending out of the program or a copy thereof.*[^127]
The right of the author to further control the transfer of a specific
tangible copy which has been lawfully released in the European market is
therefore exhausted. Nevertheless this does not affect the right of the
author to lay down certain conditions regarding the use of the copy, or
a certain destination regarding that copy[^128]. After all, the free
transfer and further distribution also needs to transfer the conditions
of the license. The copyleft principle is therefore not, in principle,
in contrary to this principle.

### Damages {#sec_damagesbelgium}

Damage caused by copyright violations are compensated under Belgian law
in accordance with the general applicable principles of the unlawful
act[^129]. This implies that the injured party of a copyright breach
needs to be compensated *en manière telle que la personne lésée se
retrouve dans la situation qui aurait été la sienne si la faute dont
elle se plaint n’avait pas été commise*[^130] Dual damages, triple
damages or other forms of punitive damages are not awarded under Belgian
law. Nor are costs reimbursed which the author spent on tracing and
prosecuting infringements[^131].

Infringements of software copyrights follow the same regime as
infringements of every other copyright[^132]. The aforementioned
principle is therefore applicable in case of copyright infringements of
software.

Infringements of software distributed under a FOSS license, do not need
to be sanctioned any differently than infringements of proprietary
software. After all, FOSS does not belong to the public domain. In no
way whatsoever has the author given up his rights.

Certain legal theory[^133] and case law[^134] assume that the damage to
the copyright owner will be limited, as the author has made his work
freely available via the internet. This argument does not always apply.

Besides establishing a reputation and recognition with the related value
creation, an author can have other reasons to make his work ‘freely’
available[^135]. The author may also have a direct monetary advantage
from the free distribution of his work. The simplest way is circulating
the free works with advertising. Another way is granting specific
services relating to the work. The free circulation of the work ensures
the work has many users. The author generates his income from the
provision of support and consulting services, or licensing “proprietary
add-ons[^136]”. Another business model is the so-called dual licensing
model[^137]. This model uses — as the name allows us to deduce- two
different licenses. The first license is often a copyleft license. This
first — free — license ensures the work is circulated quickly and has a
wide range of users. A second license without the copyleft system can
then be obtained against payment by interested parties who want to use
the work without their own additions being affected by the copyleft
principle.

FOSS cases in Belgium {#sec_casesbelgium}
---------------------

No cases have been reported yet (October 2013).

China {#chap.china}
=====

author:\[Xia,Yang\]

Introduction to software protection under Chinese law {#sec_introduction_china}
-----------------------------------------------------

### Body of law {#sec_body_china}

The regulations contained in the “The People’s Republic of China
Copyright Law” are formulated to protect the rights of copyright owners,
to safeguard interests in the development, dissemination and use of
computer software, to encourage the development and application of
computer software, and to promote the software industry and the
development of information technology in the context of the national
economy.

The key legal regulation in the context of software is the general
Copyright Act. While there is a Software Act, it is a special statute in
relation to the general Copyright Act, and as such does not contain any
specific provisions above and beyond its terms.

### Software Act: Object of protection {#sec_object_china}

Computer programs and preparatory material related to their development
are protected by copyright and are equivalent to literary works within
the meaning of the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and
Artistic Works. According to the Copyright Law, only original computer
programs enjoy copyright protection. This means that a computer program
has to be an original intellectual creation of its author. No other
criteria may be used to determine whether the program is subject to
copyright protection. The ideas and principles behind computer programs
or technical interfaces are explicitly denied copyright protection.

The term computer software (hereinafter referred to as software) refers
to computer programs and related documentation.

The relevant terms are defined as follows:

\(a) A computer program is the code sequence used by computers or other
devices capable of processing information, or a sequence of symbolic
instructions or statements which can be automatically converted into a
sequence of coded instructions. The source code and object code is of
the same program.

\(b) A document contains the text data and charts used to describe the
computer program’s contents, composition, design, functional
specifications, development and test results, such as details of the
program design, flow charts, user manuals, and so on.

Software protection under these regulations must be independently
developed acquired by the developer, and relates to a specific tangible
object.

Legislation on copyright protection for software does not extend to the
ideas used in software development, processing, and methods of operation
or mathematical concepts and suchlike.

### Authors/Beneficiaries {#sec_authors_china}

The relevant terms are defined as follows:

\(a) A software developer can be a legal entity or organization
responsible for the actual organizational development, direct
development and software development; or can be an individual person
responsible for the independent software completed by their own effort.

\(b) A software copyright owner is an individual person, a legal entity
or an organization that enjoys the copyright in accordance with this
regulation.

Chinese citizens, legal entities or organizations enjoy copyright in
accordance with this regulation regardless of whether their software is
published or not. Foreigners and stateless persons enjoy copyright in
accordance with these regulations if their software is first published
in China. Foreigners and stateless persons also enjoy copyright
protection under these regulations if the developer is a resident of a
state that has signed an agreement with China or an international treaty
to which China is a signatory.

Software copyright by default belongs to the software developer unless
otherwise stated. If there is no proof to the contrary, the individual
person, legal entity or organization holding the copyright is therefore
deemed the developer whose name is on the software.

If the software is developed by two or more individual persons, legal
entities or organizations, the co-ownership of the copyright is
stipulated by a written contract.

If there is no written contract to describe ownership and rights, or the
contract is not clearly defined, the jointly developed software can be
used separately and the developers of each respective part may be
entitled to independent copyright. However, the copyright protection
afforded in this context does not extend to the entire software
developed. If a situation where co-developed software cannot be divided
and no contract or other form of mutual agreement exists between the
co-developers, then no single developer may prevent the other developers
from exercising their rights apart from the right of transfer, but the
benefits have to be fairly distributed amongst all the co-developers.

### Exclusive rights {#sec_exclusive_china}

Software copyright holders enjoy the following rights:

\(a) Publication right

\(b) The right of authorship

\(c) Amendment right

\(d) Reproduction right

\(e) Distribution right

\(f) Lending right

\(g) Right to network Dissemination of information

\(h) Translation right

According to the second paragraph of Article 10 of the Copyright Law, if
the copyright holders allow others to exercise their rights, they are
entitled to payment in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
contract. By the same token, the owner of a software copyright may
authorize others to exercise his or her software copyright and the right
to receive remuneration, or fully transfer that copyright or
renumeration right.

### Exceptions to exclusive rights {#_exceptions_to_exclusive_rights}

Owners of lawful copies of software enjoy the following rights:

\(a) The right to install the software on a computer and other devices
capable of processing information;

\(b) The right to make backup copies to prevent losses. These backup
copies may not be made available to others for use by any means, and the
owner must destroy the backup copies if he or she loses proprietorship
of the lawful copy of the software;

\(c) To use the computer application software and to improve its
functionality and performance by making necessary modifications;
however, unless otherwise provided, without permission from the software
copyright owner the modified software may not be supplied to any third
party;

In order to study and research the inner design and principle of a
computer program, involving its installation, display, transmission,
storage or other use, the granting of software copyright permission is
subject to payment of remuneration.

To authorize others to exercise activities covered by software copyright
restrictions, the parties have to enter into a written contract. If
there is no written contract or agreement expressly stipulating an
exclusive license, the right to exercise the copyright has to be treated
as non-proprietary.

There are cases where such contracts are not necessary. Article 30 of
the Computer Software Act explains the circumstances in which a
copyright holder’s authorization is not required for reproducing and/or
translating a computer program in order to obtain interoperability
information.

Article 30 is compulsory law, and contractual provisions to the contrary
are deemed not to exist. However, exercising these statutory rights is
often difficult in practice because the licensee generally has no access
to the source code of the application, and it is not legal to enforce
source code access for the purposes of interoperability.

### Dispute mediation {#_dispute_mediation}

The software copyright infringement dispute may be mediated. If the
mediation is inadequate or the mediation achieves the agreement latter
side to renege on the mediation promise, they can go to the People’s
court to carry on litigation. If the litigant is not willing to mediate,
may also go directly to the People’s court.

### Term of protection {#_term_of_protection}

The software copyright’s protection period is 25 years, beginning from
the initial publication of the software and ending on December 31 of the
25th year following. Before the expiration date of the protection, the
software copyright owner may apply to the software registration
management organization to get another 25 years, but the total
protection period afforded to any software product cannot surpass 50
years.

### Special measures {#_special_measures}

When the owner of copyright is not able to protect his or her rights
related to software provided in an infringing manner, the end recipient
of the illegal code still has a duty to destroy or otherwise cease use
of the code once they are made aware of the situation. However, they
have recourse to seek compensation for this loss and its ancillary
consequences from the original supplier of the infringing code.

Unprotected software and non-commercial software {#sec_unprotected_china}
------------------------------------------------

Software that is an intellectual creation of the author is regarded as
original and can obtain copyright protection, while non-original
software is excluded from such protection. Third party revision or
sharing without agreement from the software copyright owner or their
legitimate successor is prohibited.

Teaching activities, scientific research, and government agencies
operating official functions can use software for non-commercial
purposes; these non-commercial rights include the ability to make free
copies of the software without the copyright owner or its legitimate
successor’s agreement. However, the software’s name must be correctly
mentioned in use and the exploiter should not infringe upon other rights
which the owner and its legitimate successor enjoy. Additionally, after
the copied software has completed its non-commercial use, it should be
reclaimed or be destroyed properly and must not be used for other goals
or be given to other people.

Unprotected software and public domain software {#sec_pd_china}
-----------------------------------------------

Only software that is an intellectual creation of the author can obtain
copyright protection. Non-original software does not come into
consideration for copyright protection and can, in principle, be used
freely.

Under Chinese law, public domain software is considered as software to
which the author has given up all rights and on which no other party is
able to enforce any rights. This software can be used, reproduced or
executed freely without obtaining permission from a rights holder or the
payment of a fee to such a party or their representatives. Public domain
software may in certain cases even be presented by third parties as
their own work, and by modifying the original work, third parties can
take certain versions of such code out of the public domain again.

The underlying principle is that software value can only be achieved
through protection granted by intellectual property law. Under the
general law in this field, value is presented by granting certain
exclusive rights to the legal owner of a work, who may realize fiscal or
other returns through contracts with third parties, with the proviso
that such rights eventually cease and the work enters the public domain.
This creates a circle of economic activity that supports industrial and
economic development.

Proprietary software and open source software (free software) differ
only in terms of their circulation mechanism, and not in terms of the
applicability of Copyright.

Analysis of FOSS under Chinese law {#sec_analysis_china}
----------------------------------

### Copyrights {#_copyrights}

From the view of most enterprises, software development differs from
traditional creation of copyrighted work. It is no longer subject to a
single person or even an organization. With the development of the
Internet, very few people operate behind closed doors in the software
industry. Building on the ideas and experience of predecessors' has
become a crucial factor to the development of software technology.

#### Qualification of FOSS {#_qualification_of_foss}

Copyright law in China operates under the principle of “self-executing”
protection. After a creative good is completed it is automatically
subject to copyright protection regardless of whether it is published or
registered. The right to publish source code — an intrinsically
important part of the FOSS — belongs to the software’s “publication
right” range. The protections of software copyright may be considered as
a mix of applicable law and contracts between the rights holder and any
third parties. This model is from the province of international
conventions and national copyright laws of the US, and the protection of
software copyright law in China is no exception.

One pertinent example is that the Chinese government issued a special
regulation on software copyright protection as part of the Copyright Law
with the subject “Computer Software Protection Regulations”. This
provides that without the copyright owner or his legal transferee’s
consent the use of software is equal to copyright infringement; in the
“Computer Software Protection Regulations” Article 18 and 19 the
provision of software licenses and transfer of rights must be in the
form of a written agreement. In this sense, protection of software
copyright in China and international copyright norms are virtually
identical.

Article 12 of the Copyright law of the people’s republic of China states
that where a work is created by adaptation, translation, annotation or
arrangement of pre-existing work, the copyright in the work shall be
enjoyed by the adaptor, translator or arranger, provided that the
exercise of such copyright shall not prejudice the copyright of the
original work. Interpretation of the original author should be via their
consent and include remuneration, while right of authorship remaining
with that party. If the interpretation is created out the period of
protection for creative works, it should be with the original author’s
consent, but no remuneration is necessary. Naturally the original work
shall not be violated or distorted in the process of interpretation.

Article 13 of the Copyright law provides for co-ownership of copyrighted
works, covering situations where a work is created jointly by two or
more co-authors. Put simply, in these cases copyright in the work shall
be enjoyed jointly by those co-authors while any person who has not
participated in the creation of the work may not claim co-authorship. If
a work of joint authorship can be separated into independent parts and
exploited separately, each co-author may be entitled to independent
copyright in the parts they have created, provided that the exercise of
such copyright shall not prejudice the copyright in the work as a whole.
The general consideration is that the creation of a work of joint
authorship requires cooperation and arrangement between the authors. If
one party does not get consent from the other, then each party only has
copyright and its attendant right of modification or distribution in
their own section of the work.

#### Rights of the original co-authors {#_rights_of_the_original_co_authors}

“Participation” in co-authorship refers to expression in the form of a
creative and intellectual work applied either in conceptual planning or
writing operations. If a party does not do creative work that falls
under this definition of participation, then they cannot become regarded
as a joint author. This participation and its attendant copyright in the
work of joint authorship can be further regarded in two different ways,
either with the whole coauthored work taking a form that can be split
into individually authored sections or a form that cannot be split into
separate parts. The ability to distinguish individual contributions as
opposed to entirely combined contributions naturally has implications
for personal rights and property rights and their exercise in market
transactions.

Unless the components of software can be clearly distinguished, it is
almost certainly going to be defined as an “indivisible work” under
Chinese law. These are works whereby it cannot be concluded clearly what
the individual contribution of every author is, e.g. when two authors
write the source code together.

Where a work is created jointly by two or more co-authors, the copyright
in the work shall be enjoyed jointly by those co-authors. Any person who
has not participated in the creation of the work may not claim the co-
authorship.

If a work of joint authorship can be separated into independent parts
and exploited separately, each co-author may be entitled to independent
copyright in the parts that he has created, provided that the exercise
of such copyright shall not prejudice the copyright in the joint work as
a whole.

On the other side, if a work of joint authorship can’t be separated into
independent parts and exploited separately, the copyright in the work
shall be enjoyed jointly by those co-authors, in which case the authors
are free to regulate the exercise of the copyrights by agreement. If
they can’t reach any kinds of agreements relating to the moral rights
and have no cogent reasons, No party shall prevent exercise of the
rights except for the transfer request, but the proceeds should
distribute to all the other parties with attendant rights.

#### Authors of derivative works {#_authors_of_derivative_works}

FOSS often falls under the category of a derivative or composed work.
Derivative works and composed works are works whose originality may be
definable, but whose existence depends on existing work(s), from which
at least some original characteristics are copied.

Where a work is created by adaptation, translation, annotation or
arrangement of a pre-existing work, the copyright in this work thus
created shall be enjoyed by the adaptor, translator or arranger,
provided that the exercise of such copyright shall not prejudice the
copyright in the original work.

The copyright in a work created by compilation shall be enjoyed by the
compiler, provided that the exercise of such copyright shall not
prejudice the copyright in the pre-existing works included in the
compilation. The authors of such works included in a compilation as can
be exploited separately shall be entitled to exercise their copyright in
their works independently.

So, the author(s) of the derivative or composed work are the only
persons with a copyright on their work. This is not independent and full
copyright, which is restricted, however, because the derivative or
composed work cannot be operated without the consent of the holder of
the copyright on the original work. In the case of FOSS licenses such
consent is not a problem, subject to respecting the terms and conditions
(e.g. regarding further distribution of the derivative work).

#### The assignment of copyrights {#_the_assignment_of_copyrights}

In order to control the rights related to a specific FOSS project, it
may be useful to collect all copyrights concerning this project within
one organization. The existence of such an organization can simplify the
management and enforcement of joint rights, with the collective
management of copyrights is usually, but not necessarily, regulated by
the fiduciary transfer of copyrights. This assignment is relatively
trivial, with ownership of copyright in a commissioned work being
assigned via contract between the commissioning and the commissioned
parties. In the absence of a contract or of an explicit agreement in the
contract, the copyright in such a work shall belong to the commissioned
party.

### Moral copyrights {#_moral_copyrights}

FOSS originated in America, and therefore attaches less importance to
the moral rights of the author than it might under a country governed by
Civil Law. The Open Source Definition specifies that the author of
software distributed under a FOSS license cannot oppose the use of the
software by certain people and groups or for certain areas of
application.

For example, according to article 22, in some cases, a work may be used
without permission from, and without payment of remuneration to, the
copyright owner, provided that the name of the author and the title of
the work shall be indicated and the other rights enjoyed by the
copyright owner by virtue of this Law shall not be prejudiced.
Furthermore, article 23 specifies the statutory license of copyright.

Whether an author is able to give up all his rights on a work is more
complex under Chinese law, as such law contains the principal
indefeasibility of the moral rights. Although renouncement of moral
rights is possible in principle, the global renouncement of the future
exercise of moral rights is void, and this naturally also applies to
moral rights on software.

The author of a work distributed under the FOSS license shall therefore
probably be able to oppose any use of his work by people or groups or
for certain purposes which affects his honour or reputation, based on
his moral rights.

Moral rights are reflected in derivative works. The author of the
original work will therefore, based on his moral rights, not only be
able to oppose the use by third parties of his work, but also the use of
derivative works which affect his honour or reputation.

### Enforcing FOSS licenses {#_enforcing_foss_licenses}

The question whether a FOSS license can be enforced depends on whether a
valid license was issued. The essential questions are: (i) between whom
is a license granted, and (ii) has the license been validly granted?

#### Contracting parties {#_contracting_parties}

In China, the Contract Law governs all kinds of licenses, but it can be
questioned whether FOSS licenses fall into the sphere of the Contract
Law of China. There is no clear stipulation about FOSS licenses in its
wording, and no case has yet came before the People’s court to provide a
ruling about the validity of the license. Pending this, a more general
interpretation in view of existing rules and norms may be proposed.A
creative work that needs two or more people to complete normally
involves an agreement to arrange copyright allocation or grants. If one
author makes his work available under a FOSS license, the answer is
clear: the license is reached between the licensee and the author. But
in some cases, the works are finished by different people and they are
all contributed to the programs. At this time, the question becomes more
complicated. With whom the licensee reaches a contract depends on the
different cooperation methods applied by the co-authors.

If a work of joint authorship can be separated into independent parts
and exploited separately, each co-author may be entitled to independent
copyright in the parts that he has created, provided that the exercise
of such copyright shall not prejudice the copyright in the joint work as
a whole. This would allow for the author who created the independent
parts to grant a license to contracting parties based on his or her
individual section of the work. Meanwhile, if the work cannot be
separated in such a fashion, and the authors do not collectively agree
on general license terms, a license and implied contract should be
reached between the licensee and every author of the program.

Most FOSS licenses solve this through agreements such as BSD, Apache and
GPL licenses. For example, the GPL creates a contractual bond between
the licensee and all authors in the chain. GPL version 3 contains the
following clause: “Each time you convey a covered work, the recipient
automatically receives a license from the original licensors, to run,
modify and propagate that work, subject to this License” and GPL version
2 states that “each time you redistribute the Program (or any work based
on the Program), the recipient automatically receives a license from the
original licensor…” While apparently effective in US and other markets
and internally consistent with the rest of the license, it is not clear
that this construction will be regarded valid under China Copyright Law.

#### Validity of the FOSS licenses {#_validity_of_the_foss_licenses}

An author chooses a FOSS license because he wants to distribute his work
and make it available to others — possibly with certain restrictions.
For him it is important that he can enforce these restrictions. However,
the status of FOSS author rights in China is not entirely clear.

The most common use of FOSS code development and therefore the
application of the licenses is through the internet. While conventional
IT agreements are reached by the explicit acceptance of the terms and
conditions by the licensee following the signing of the terms and
conditions, FOSS software is made available with some simple
specification on a website or in the source code form that it concerns
FOSS. The license usually does not need to be explicitly accepted. In
other words, the act of opening the packaging or clicking “I agree”
button — methods to reach a licensing agreement are generally considered
to be valid and are covered by “The electronic signature law of the
People’s Republic of China” — tend not to apply with FOSS.

Having to click and confirm every time could in some cases interfere
with the use of the software, according to the international common
practice. The Open Source Definition opposes demanding explicit
agreement with the license conditions with the aim of confirming the
agreement between licensor and licensee.

The question is whether in these cases a valid license is possible. The
answer to this question is not clear under Chinese law. The reason is
that the user of a copyright protected work needs to be able to indicate
the grounds on which he is able to use the work. FOSS is still under the
protection of present copyright law and using the software without the
author’s consent implies a copyright infringement, with the implication
that everyone who wants to use software which they find via the
internet, they should actively look for the license, at least if they
know such software will be under the terms of a license. If the user
cannot prove that they elected obey the license, they must refrain from
using it. But without a mechanism to do so, a potential grey area
exists.Of course it is doubtful whether a user would benefit from
disputing the existence of a FOSS license. If the user disputes the
conclusion of the FOSS license, this implies no legally valid copyright
license was granted and the user therefore is not allowed to use the
software. Renouncement of copyrights should not be open to conjecture,
but needs to be proven. The availability of a work on the internet does
not mean it becomes public domain.

#### Validity of the contract {#_validity_of_the_contract}

Rights holders can place contracts and any party violating the agreement
must assume responsibility for their actions. When an author chooses a
FOSS license it is relatively clear that he wants to distribute his work
and make it available to others — possibly with certain restrictions.
For him it is important that he can enforce these restrictions.

The exception in China is that for public welfare or personal use,
people can accord to the principle of reasonable use, and do not need to
conclude contracts or pay any remuneration in this context. This does
not preclude the necessity of the authors and users signing a contract
for licensing, but may impact some of its scope. It would be expected
that such a contract would include licensing rights, whether licensing
right is exclusive or not, the scope and space of using, the
remuneration’s standards and methods if applicable and the events that
may be regarded as breach of contract.

Whatever the situation, the Regulation for Computer Software Protection
in China provides that the licensing of software copyright shall be in
possession of a contract for licensing. And the licensee may not
exercise the right that has not been licensed by the software copyright
owner in the contract for licensing.

Normally, rights holders in FOSS write programs collaboratively under a
license that permits users to use, change, copy, and distribute the
works free of charge, provided that they follow the licensing guidelines
of the software. This can cause some confusion because commercial
software doesn’t usually allow you to change a program and redistribute
it unless you specifically negotiate that in an additional license. But
in both cases if you make copies or distribute modified versions of the
software without permission, you infringe the copyright, and you must
take the responsibility. By implication when locating software on the
internet it is very important to explore what license is being used. If
the user can’t prove that he knows the content of the license applicable
to the work, he must refrain from using it, and cannot seek to assume
that no license or contract is in play. Only in cases where the terms
applied to the contract are manifestly unfair can a move be taken to
void its applicability.

### Waiver and liability {#_waiver_and_liability}

Typically, FOSS licenses contain very strong exoneration clauses, which
discharge the author from all liability. The reason for this is that
FOSS is often made available without a fee, as a result of which the
author generates insufficient income to pay for liability insurances and
legal costs. In China, the validity of this clause is not entirely
clear, with the reason being questions that arise about the extent to
which such exoneration clauses comply with the general validity
requirements under Chinese law due to the existence of no specific legal
regulation of FOSS licenses. Liability requirements are scattered in
Chinese civil law, with an example being that Article 53 of the contract
law of PRC states that the following types of exoneration in contracts
are invalid:

\(i) that causes the personal injury,

\(ii) that causes property loss by intentional misconduct or gross
negligence.

Meanwhile, Article 52 in the contract law stipulates: if only there is
one of following state, the contract shall be invalid:

\(i) obtain the contract by means of fraud or stress, at the same time
causes damage to the interests of the state.

\(ii) viciously collude, to damage the interests of the state, the
collective, or a third party.

\(iii) use legal form to cover up illegal purpose.

\(iv) do harm to the public interests. And

\(v) And violate the compulsory laws or administrative rules.

Generally speaking when considering FOSS license as a form of civil
contract, all the regulations of the contract behaviour are available
for the FOSS license. But with such licenses being quite different from
typical contracts there remain areas of differing potential
interpretation and therefore potential confusion. One remedy in the mid
to long-term is to add FOSS licenses as a special form of contracts in
the contract law of PRC.

Chinese legislation doesn’t normally perceive a large difference between
guarantee liability from amateur and professional sellers, but there are
some considerations to take into account regarding FOSS. Theoretically,
there is difference if the stipulating party be considered as a
professional seller. The professional seller is deemed to know the
defect in the software, and in pursuance of article 153 of the contract
law of PRC, contractual provisions of non- indemnity for surface or
hidden quality defects have no effect if the seller knew about the
defect at the time of the sale. Additionally, according to Article 150,
the seller has the duty to guarantee defects. The professional seller of
FOSS will therefore be liable in principle for issues with FOSS code
provided unless he can also provide proof of ignorance regarding
defects. Such proof may be hard to provide.

### The copyleft principle {#_the_copyleft_principle}

#### Principle {#_principle}

A characteristic found in many FOSS licenses is the so-called “copyleft”
principle, which is a new and different way of enforcing copyright in
software. FOSS licenses which incorporate the copyleft principle lay
down by contract that everyone in the chain of consecutive users, in
return for the right of use that is assigned, needs to distribute the
improvements he makes to the software and the derivative works he makes
under the same conditions to other users as those under which he
received the original work. In other words, software which incorporates
copyleft FOSS needs to be distributed as copyleft FOSS. FOSS means
sharing with each other, instead of monopolizing.

This has the consequence that it is not possible to incorporate
copyright protected parts of copyleft software in proprietary licensed
work directly.The copyleft principle can restrict the commercial
possibilities of the software, at least regarding business models or
product deployments that assume proprietary behaviour. Sometimes
warnings are issued for the dangers that companies could encounter if a
negligent or vindictive employee were to incorporate a piece of copyleft
code in the code of proprietary software and parties relatively new to
FOSS worry that a company would be obliged to make its proprietary
software available under a copyleft FOSS license. Although caution is
necessary regarding the use of the third party work, one can ask oneself
whether such scenarios are realistic under Chinese law. Copyright
protection is still strong and absolute in current Chinese legal system.
The sanction for incorporating copyleft code in proprietary software
will usually be restricted to a prohibition to distribute the software
which is in breach or the obligation to remove this piece of code from
the program. If the unlawful use has caused damage to the author, this
damage will need to be reimbursed, but not more than they actually
suffered damage. As such, the implications of copyleft are restricted to
normal measures of expected remedy under copyright law.

#### Validity {#_validity}

Questions regarding the validity and implications of copyleft clauses
coincide with questions regarding whether an author is able to validly
lay down how derivative works need to be distributed. The answer to this
question under Chinese law is not definitive.

The copyright owner or copyright-related right holders are able to lay
down the use of the work for a particular use, or link certain
conditions to this. Such a right was recognized and based on an
interpretation of Article 9 of the copyright law of 27 October 2001.
According to the rule, the copyright owner can determine the destination
of a work, to copy or distribute, to rent or to exhibit, to performance
or screening, etc. They also can license or transfer the rights, with an
example being that a copyright collective management organization can
claim in its own name for copyright owners, and can carry on lawsuit and
arbitration activities as copyrights owner.

The right to determine the destination not only applies inter partes,
but “erga omnes”, provided that the third parties, in all
reasonableness, should know what the destination is. The author can
therefore lay down the copyleft condition based on his right to
determine the destination of his work, though aspects of derivative work
use/reuse may challenge this. According to the provisions of Article 12
of the copyright law, the author of the original work has no rights on
the derivative work; that’s to say “A work derived from adaptation,
translation, annotation or arrangement of a pre-existing work, the
copyrights belongs to the author of the derivative work which be
operated doesn’t subject to the consent of the copyright owner of the
original work, but the exercise of such copyright shall not infringe the
copyright in the original work”.

In summary, all rights are subject to abuse, including the copyright. An
author can therefore not randomly exercise his economic and moral
rights. A lawful tangible or moral interest needs to be proven. The
implications of Article 9 are in no measure overridden by those of
Article 12, but the applicability of both will probably have an impact
in any case involving right of use issues and FOSS licenses in a court
of law.

The traditional use of copyrighted work in China would see approval from
a right holder subject to some form of remuneration, and the simple
outcome that other situations probably constitute infringement. But
licensing a work under a copyleft restriction will in principle not
constitute an abuse of rights, and with “reasonable use”, you can make
use of the work without the consent of the copyright holder and without
the need to pay remuneration. Of course, the licensing or assignment
contract of the copyright owner has not explicitly been transferred, and
you can’t randomly exercise the rights without the consent of the
copyright owner, otherwise will constitute infringement.

Viewed formally under Chinese law, a FOSS license is a contract.
According to the contract law, it is effective as long as the parties
signed the contract voluntarily, it contains no violation of the
mandatory regulations applicable to contracts, and if the parties
strictly obey the law to exercise rights and perform obligations. A
legitimate moral interest applied by a rights holder could be the
decision to keep his work within the FOSS community, also in a
derivative format, through the measure known as copyleft. Companies
which have constructed a business model around distributing software
under copyleft restrictions will usually be able to prove the existence
of a legitimate interest.

### Damages {#sec_damages_china}

Damage caused by copyright violations are compensated under copyright
law in accordance with the general civil liability of the illegal act.
This implies that the injured party of a copyright breach needs to be
compensated.

According to the provisions in Article 47 of the copyright law the
copyright administration has the rights to stop the infringement,
confiscate the illegal income, destroy the infringing reproductions, and
may impose fines under the condition of infringing the public interests.
If the circumstances are serious, they also can confiscate materials,
tools, and other equipment which was used for making infringing
reproductions. The one who infringe the copyright can be considered as
constituting a crime, and shall bear criminal responsibility.

According to Article 36 of the regulations of copyright law of 2 August
2002, parties who have violated Article 47 of the copyright law and also
offended public interest should be punished with a fine that is 3 times
of the income of the illegal operation or 10 thousand Yuan if the income
of the illegal operation is difficult to calculate.

Infringements of software copyright are regarded in the same light as
infringements of every other copyright. The aforementioned principle is
therefore applicable in case of copyright infringements of software.

Additionally, according to the provisions in article 23 and article 24
of the software protection regulations, all actions which have infringed
the software copyright should hold the following civil liabilities:

1.  Stop the infringement

2.  Eliminate the bad effects

3.  Apologize

4.  Compensation for the losses

5.  Civil sanctions.

FOSS essentially seeks to provide software as the effective public
intellectual property of all mankind, and allows for sure software to be
distributed freely between the persons of preparation and application.
Any restrictions of the intellectual property rights will eventually
limit and obstruct its development.

Therefore certain legal experts may assume that the damage to the
copyright owner will be limited, as he has made his work freely
available via the internet.

However, the essence of FOSS is not free, but “thought sharing,
knowledge sharing and resource sharing”. The user can freely operate,
copy, distribute, research and improvement the software, and avoid the
intervening from the proprietary software. One can modify the program to
make it better, make it more applicable. One can experience the
excitement which comes from the achievement which be improved more
efficiency. But one retains certain obligations to all others.

Besides establishing a reputation and recognition with the related value
creation, an author can have other reasons to make his work “freely
available”. The author may also have a direct monetary advantage from
the free distribution of his work. The simplest way is circulating the
free works f advertising. Another way is granting specific services to
support the software. Taking this further into a specific economic
example, the free circulation of the work can provide that it has as
many users as possible, allowing the author to generate income from the
provision of technological support and consulting services, or
“licensing proprietary add-ons”. Another business model is the so-called
dual licensing model. This model uses — as the name allows us to
deduce — two different licenses. The first license is often a copyleft
license intended to provide a wide range of users. The second license
without the copyleft system can then leveraged to obtain payment from
interested parties who want to avoid the copyleft principle.

FOSS cases in China {#sec_uk_china}
-------------------

No cases have been reported yet (June 2011).

Finland {#chap.finland}
=======

author:\[von Willebrand,Martin\] author:\[Tanskanen,Henri\]

Introduction to software protection under Finnish law {#sec_introductionfinland}
-----------------------------------------------------

### Body of law {#sec_finland_body}

In Finland, copyright protection of software is regulated under the
Copyright Act, originally enacted on 8 July 1961 and amended multiple
times thereafter. The current version of the Act is available in Finnish
and Swedish via the Finlex website of the Ministry of Justice.[^138] An
unofficial translation of the Act by the Ministry of Justice is also
available, although it is not as up to date as the Finnish and Swedish
versions. The Copyright Act provides for stipulations on copyright and
many neighbouring rights, such as the right to a database and the right
to directories. Software copyright is covered by the general
stipulations on copyright and a number of software-specific
stipulations.

The Finnish Copyright Act implements the Council Directive of 14 May
1991 on the legal protection of computer programs (91/250/EEC, as
amended) by way of amendments enacted on 11 January 1991 and 7 May
1993.[^139]

In the current Copyright Act, the relevant articles containing computer
program specific stipulations are:

Article 1, second paragraph

:   literary work

Article 25 j

:   copying and examination

Article 25 k

:   reverse engineering

Article 40 b

:   employment relationship

Article 56 c

:   sanction on distribution of protection circumvention

In addition to the above, exceptions concerning computer programs can be
found in Art 11, second paragraph; Art 12, second paragraph; Art 19,
third paragraph; Art 50a, fourth paragraph; Art 50b, third paragraph;
Art 50c, fifth paragraph and Art 56a, second paragraph.

### Copyright Act: Object of protection {#sec_finland_copyrightact}

Computer programs are protected by copyright as literary works, as
stipulated in Article 1 of the Copyright Act. In order to benefit from
the protection, a computer program needs to be original in the sense
that it is the author’s own intellectual creation.[^140] As stipulated
in paragraph 3 of Article 1 of the Computer Programs Directive, no other
criteria may be used to determine whether the program can be subject to
copyright protection. Based on this, it has been argued that computer
programs are eligible for copyright protection under less stringent
requirements compared to other literary works which need to surpass a
certain threshold of originality.[^141]

According to the preparatory works to amendments of the Copyright Act
(Government Proposal HE 161/90; Committee Report KM 1987:8) as well as
several subsequent decisions of the Copyright Council, the eligibility
for copyright protection in the case of a computer program is to be
determined, first and foremost, by assessing the choices made by the
programmer in implementing a solution to a computing or data processing
problem. A computer program is protected by copyright if it can be
considered as an independent and original result of the author’s
creative work. If the computing or data processing problem at hand has
only one solution determined by external factors, the resulting computer
program does not represent the author’s original creative contribution
and is not eligible for copyright protection. The same goes for “simple
programs containing only a series of measures that can be deemed as
axiomatic by a professional” as well as “commonly applied solutions” to
programming tasks.[^142]

The case-law on computer programs and eligibility for copyright
protection is somewhat scarce, consisting mainly of opinions issued by
the Copyright Council.[^143] In cases where the Copyright Council has
stated its opinion on whether a particular program is eligible for
copyright protection, the Council has mainly relied on one of the two
following tests, i.e., assessing (a) whether there would have been
several alternative programming solutions to the problem at hand, or (b)
whether anyone independently embarking on the same programming task
could have ended up with a similar outcome. In light of the fact that
there are usually several possible solutions to any programming task,
the level of originality required for copyright protection of a computer
program can be safely assumed to be rather low.

### Authors/Beneficiaries {#sec_finland_AuthorsBeneficiaries}

Copyright to a work, such as a computer program, belongs to the author.
An author is always a natural person, since only individuals are able to
author intellectual creations.

There is only one automatic transfer of copyright under the Copyright
Act. Under Article 40 b of the Act, if a computer program and a work
directly relating to it have been created in the fulfilment of duties
arising from an employment relationship, copyright to the program and
the work passes to the employer. The same applies to the creations of
functionaries of public entities.

The concept of a computer program covers software code both in source
code and binary form. Source code commentaries in the code fall under
the definition of computer software, or at least under the concept of
“works that directly relate to” computer software. Source code
documentation as well as other supporting material classify as works
directly related to computer software.[^144] Supporting material can
consist of, e.g., user manuals, instructions and the like. Other works
contained in the software (such as text, music, pictures, forms and
movies) may fall under the definition of “works that directly relate to
it”, but it is not always certain to what extent this is the case.
According to the preparatory works of the Copyright Act (HE 161/90), a
text file contained within the program, for example, would fall under
the definition.

The right to a database created by an employee or a public functionary
is passed to the employer or public body in a similar manner.

### Exclusive rights {#sec_finland_Exclusiverights}

The general exclusive rights stipulated in the Copyright Act apply to
computer programs. According to Article 2 of the Copyright Act, the
economic rights are comprised of the exclusive right to control the work
by (a) reproducing copies and (b) making the work available to the
public in original or altered form, as a translation or adaptation or in
another literary or artistic form, or by any other technique.

The reproduction of a copy comprises reproduction in whole or in part,
directly or indirectly, temporarily or permanently and with any means
and in any form. Transferring of a copy to a device in which it can be
performed is also considered reproduction.

Making the work available to the public occurs when 1) the work is
communicated to the public by wire or by wireless means, including in
ways that members of the public may access the material from a place and
at a time individually chosen by them; 2) the work is publicly performed
to an audience present at a performance; 3) a copy of the work is
offered for sale, rental, lending or it is otherwise distributed to the
public; or when 4) the work is displayed publicly without technical aid.
The concepts of public performance and communication to the public
include the performance and communication of a work to a relatively
large closed circle provided that there is an intention to make profit.

### Exceptions to exclusive rights {#sec_finland_ExceptionstoExclusiveRights}

Article 19 of the Copyright Act stipulates that the first sale in the
European Economic Area of a copy of a program with the consent of the
right holder shall exhaust the distribution right of that copy within
the Area, with the exception of the right to control further rental or
lending of the program or a copy thereof.

Article 25 j provides that

\(1) In the absence of an express contractual provision, no authorization
by the right holder is required for the lawful acquirer to make any such
copies of or alterations to the computer program which are necessary for
using the program for the intended purpose, including error correction.

\(2) The reproduction of the program by way of a back-up copy by a person
having a right to use the computer program may not be prevented, insofar
as that copy is necessary to use the program.

\(3) The person having the right to use a copy of the computer program is
entitled, without the authorization of the right holder, to observe,
study or test the functioning of the program in order to determine the
ideas and principles which underlie any element of the program, provided
that he or she does this in connection with loading, displaying,
running, transmitting or storing the program.

Essentially, the above article restates the three exceptions under
Article 5 of the Computer Programs Directive. The exceptions (2) and (3)
above are mandatory, meaning that a contract stipulation to the contrary
is void.

Article 25 k of the Copyright Act explains in detail the circumstances
in which no authorization of the right holder is required for the
reproduction and/or translation of a computer program provided that such
actions are necessary for obtaining the information necessary for the
interoperability of an independently created computer program with other
programs. This exception is mandatory, as well, and a contract
stipulation to the contrary is void.

### Moral rights {#sec_finland_moral_rights}

General stipulations of the Copyright Act on moral rights apply to
computer programs, as well. Moral rights under Finnish law are comprised
of the paternity right and the right of respect. Paternity right means
that in any reproduction or dissemination of the work to the public the
author has to be stated in accordance with good practice. The right of
respect, in turn, means that modifications of the work must not offend
the literary or artistic value or originality of the author, and that
they may not be made available to the public in any manner or form that
is offensive to the author.

Due to the nature of computer programs, the moral rights are considered
to have only minor importance. Computer programs can hardly be modified
in a way offending the author, and good practice in the field does not
normally require stating the name of the author where the author is an
employee and the copyright holder is the employer.[^145]

Moral rights cannot be transferred, and they may be waived only where
the use of the work is limited in scope and character. This applies
equally to the right of paternity and to the right of respect.

### Term of protection {#sec_finland_Termofprotection}

The term of copyright protection for computer programs is the same as
for other works, i.e., 70 years following the year of death of the
author (Article 43). In the case of multiple authors, the term is
calculated from the year of death of the last living author. In the case
of derivative works, the copyright term of the right of the modifier is
independent of the copyright term of the original work, i.e., the
copyright to the modifications lasts for 70 years following the death of
the author of the modifications.[^146]

### Copyright assignment {#sec_finland_copyright_assignment}

Copyright can be assigned in full, except for moral rights. Most
importantly, moral rights include the obligation to state the author
when distributing the work to the public as well as, although hardly
applicable to computer programs, the prohibition to alter the work in a
way that offends the author. Under Finnish law, copyright assignment is
not subject to any requirements of form and oral agreements, for
example, are entirely possible. However, for the purposes of evidence,
written contracts are recommended.

Unless otherwise agreed, a copyright assignment does not include the
right to further assign the copyright or the right to modify the
assigned work. If full assignment is the objective, these rights should
be expressly included in any assignment contract.

Regarding choice of law, it seems possible that copyright originating
under the Finnish Copyright Act can be assigned under laws of another
jurisdiction, if such applicable law is agreed upon in the assignment
contract. However, this is not completely certain. The uncertainty
relates to the question of whether the freedom of contract can cover all
aspects of a right based on law.

In the relationship between an employer and an employee, copyright to a
computer program and a related work passes automatically to the employer
based on Article 40 b of the Copyright Act.[^147] Copyright to any other
type of work will remain with the employee, unless a specific agreement
on copyright assignment has been entered into in the form of an
employment agreement or otherwise. In lack of a specific agreement on
assignment, the employer will receive a right of use. The exact coverage
of such right of use is unclear, but at a minimum, it covers the primary
use of the work known at the time of the creation of the work.

In the relationship between a contractor and a procurer, no distinction
is made between computer programs and other types of works. The
copyright to the created work is held by the creator of the work, i.e.,
the contractor. If no explicit assignment is agreed upon, the contractor
will continue to hold the copyright to the created work and the procurer
will receive a right of use in accordance with the agreement between the
parties. In the absence of a specific agreement, a right of use is
presumed and derived from the joint purpose of the parties.

An unpaid contributor is treated similarly to a contractor. In lack of a
specific agreement on assignment or right of use, a right of use is
presumed and derived from the joint purpose of the parties.

### Special measures {#sec_finland_Special_Measures}

The Copyright Act contains civil law sanctions for a breach of copyright
and some provisions on criminal sanctions regarding lesser
copyright-related crimes. The Penal Code, in turn, contains criminal
sanctions on more severe copyright-related crimes.

There are some criminal consequences that are specific to computer
programs. For example, it is a criminal offence to “distribute to the
public for the purpose of gain, or for such purpose keep in possession,
any device whose sole purpose is the unauthorized removal or
circumvention of a technological means protecting a computer program”
(Article 56 c of the Copyright Act).

However, the provisions under Articles 50 a , 50 b and 50 c of the Act
regarding the prohibition of circumvention of technological measures do
not apply to computer programs.

Unprotected software and public domain software {#sec_finland_Unprotected}
-----------------------------------------------

Only software that is original in the sense that it is an intellectual
creation of the author is eligible for copyright protection.
Non-original software, then, is not eligible for such protection and can
be used freely from a copyright perspective.[^148]

There is no concept of public domain in the Finnish Copyright Act,[^149]
although based on the general principles of law, it can be concluded
that it is possible for an author to grant a computer program into the
public domain. However, this grant is possible only vis-à-vis the
economic rights but not vis-à-vis the moral rights. Public domain
computer programs are generally understood to mean such works to which
the author has renounced all copyrights and which can therefore be
freely used with the exception of moral rights.[^150]

Although there is some uncertainty as to what is required of a notice in
order to fully place a program into the public domain, the authors of
this chapter would deem such notices by the author as “This program is
placed into the public domain” or “This program is in the public domain”
to be sufficient under Finnish law. In this context, it is useful to
observe the requirements in comparison to the assignment of copyright.
In order for a copyright assignee to have the right to modify the work,
such right must be agreed upon in the assignment contract (Article 28 of
the Copyright Act). If placing a work into the public domain is compared
with an assignment of copyright “to the public”, the question is whether
the public domain notice must include a statement on modifications. Our
conclusion is that there is no such requirement, since granting the
right to modify a public domain work can be clearly seen as the
intention of any author intending to place a computer program “into the
public domain”.

FOSS, however, is not considered as public domain software under Finnish
law. This is simply because an author of FOSS reserves the copyright,
whereas an author placing a work into the public domain renounces it
altogether.

Analysis of FOSS under Finnish law {#sec_finland_analysis}
----------------------------------

Under Finnish copyright law, FOSS licenses can be examined on a very
general level as follows.

Nothing else apart from the FOSS license can grant the user of the
computer program the rights he or she needs in order to comply with
copyright legislation. Therefore, the user needs the benefit of the
copyright license grant, and that can only be achieved by fulfilling the
license conditions. To the extent the license constitutes an agreement,
the user will need to accept the conditions of such agreement.

### Copyrights {#sec_finland_Copyrights}

Although FOSS can be authored by one person or owned by one legal
entity, FOSS is often the result of the work of several authors. In such
case, the crucial question is whether the later additions together with
the original input form a jointly created work (Article 6 of the
Copyright Act), or whether the original software is instead considered
as the original work while every further contribution constitutes a
derivative work (Article 4 of the Copyright Act). The legal consequences
for these two cases are different.

#### Qualification of FOSS {#_qualification_of_foss_2}

A work that has been originally created by several parties is a jointly
created work. In addition, any work in which the end result is such that
the individual contributions cannot be separated from each other is a
joint work. Contributions to a joint work can occur either
simultaneously or successively.[^151]

FOSS can also consist of an original work and the modifications made to
it. In such case, the end result is a derivative of the original work.

In some cases, FOSS can constitute a collective work, i.e., a
combination of several parties’ works. In this case, the author of the
collective work is the person assembling and choosing the different
works. Again, the permission of the author of the collective work is
required for deciding on the license to the whole.

Looking at the different legal scenarios in the light of FOSS
development, it seems that many FOSS projects could be construed as
partly jointly created works (e.g. the portions created jointly by the
project), partly derivative works (e.g. the contributions received later
on) and partly collective works (e.g. the third party FOSS components
included in the project).

The version control systems used in software development make it often
easy to discern between contributions of different persons. Although
this might make it possible to regard everything as derivative works, it
is possible that jointly planned and executed computer programming would
still be considered as creating a joint work, even if a version control
system could be used to track every character addition to the code.

#### Rights of the original co-authors {#sec_finland_rightscoauthors}

In the case of a jointly created work, the copyright is held jointly,
meaning that each author’s permission is required for the exploitation
of the work. Regarding license choice, this means that a joint decision
is needed on the downstream license.

In case the joint authors have not agreed or are unable to agree upon
the license, the work cannot be licensed at all. Here, the rules and
principles regarding joint ownership are applied and, eventually, if no
joint solution is found, the parties have the option to apply for a
separation of the joint ownership. In such case, the end result could
be, for example, that the work is auctioned.

When starting a new project, a written upfront agreement between the
most important contributors is recommended. In principle, an oral
agreement could do just as well, but typically, the content of such
agreement can turn out hard to prove. The written agreement should cover
the nature of the project, the roles of the parties, the copyright
notices used, the downstream license applied as well as the procedures
for decision making and amending the agreement. Each author of a jointly
created work has the right to present claims on the basis of copyright
infringement, so no joint decision is necessarily required for
enforcement.

#### Authors of derivative works {#_authors_of_derivative_works_2}

Most FOSS projects will include derivative works. Even every
contribution can perhaps be considered as a derivative work. In this
case, the copyright to the original work is held by the original author,
whereas the copyright to the modifications is held by the subsequent
author. These copyrights are – when separated – independent and full
copyrights, but the derivative work cannot be distributed without the
consent of both authors.

The combination of the original work and the modifications can be used
only by the permission of both the original author and the subsequent
author. Thus, the downstream license to the whole will need to be agreed
upon together.

Again, a written upfront agreement is recommended between the major
contributors starting the project.

In the case of derivative works, as well, enforcement by the authors can
occur separately. Each author is, however, able to enforce their rights
only in relation to the part in which they hold the copyright.

### The assignment of copyrights {#sec_finland_The_assignmentofcopyrights}

In order to control the project in an organised manner, it may be useful
to collect all copyrights concerning a FOSS project within one
organisation (i.e. a legal entity). The existence of such organisation
will simplify the management and enforcement of the joint rights.[^152]
The assignment of copyright is perfectly possible under Finnish law as
long as the legal requirements have been fulfilled.[^153] Assignment can
also be carried out by way of a fiduciary assignment of copyrights. A
fiduciary assignment means that the party to whom the copyrights are
assigned shall not act for himself but on account of others who have
transferred the rights (i.e. the original authors). A fiduciary
assignment would resemble an ordinary assignment added, however, with
contractual conditions concerning the roles, rights and responsibilities
of the fiduciary and the original authors.

### Moral rights {#sec_finland_Moralcopyrights}

As described earlier (see under
[section\_title](#sec_finland_moral_rights) and
[section\_title](#sec_finland_copyright_assignment)), moral rights
cannot be assigned under Finnish law, nor can they be fully waived.
However, they have less importance with regard to computer programs.

In Finland, it is generally considered that good practice in the
software industry does not require the employer to state the names of
the employee authors (or contractor personnel) in connection with the
dissemination of a computer program. However, this does not necessarily
apply to FOSS, since (i) the authors have not assigned their copyrights
to the third parties disseminating the program, (ii) the authors have
not received salary or any another form of compensation from the third
party, and (iii) the authors are often keen to receive acknowledgement
of and respect for the use of their works.

Moral rights apply equally to FOSS regardless of whether it has been
created as a derivative work, joint work or otherwise. Each relevant
author has his or her moral rights.

### Enforcing FOSS licenses {#sec_finland_EnforcingFOSSlicenses}

In general, FOSS licenses can be deemed fully enforceable under Finnish
law. There is no existing case law on FOSS licenses, but it is clear
that nothing apart from the license can grant a third party distributor
the right to distribute the FOSS. Also, there are no formal requirements
for granting licenses. FOSS licenses are therefore enforceable.

However, it may be difficult to clearly associate a computer program
with a license. The project may have done their homework poorly, and the
license is not adequately communicated to the users, or there are
discrepancies in the information given. License attachment clauses may
be unclear. This may lead to questions of, and needs for, additional
interpretation. Also, individual licenses may have wordings subject to
interpretation, and some elements of a license may not be enforceable at
all, or the license may be interpreted differently from what was assumed
by the project. These uncertainties do not mean that FOSS licenses are
unenforceable, per se, but the end result of the enforcement might not
always be satisfactory due to unclarity in licensing and license
attachment.

There has been very little discussion in Finland on whether a computer
program license is (i) an agreement between the copyright holder and the
user including copyright permissions grants or (ii) a unilateral
permission by the copyright holder. In both cases, the document will
need to grant the copyright permissions. With regard to the available
measures of execution, copyright-related execution measures would apply
in both cases. Contract-related execution measures would be applicable
in the contract-based situation and probably in the unilateral
permission situation, as well. In fact, there is little or no difference
between these legal concepts.

Violation of a license condition would normally classify as a copyright
infringement. A FOSS license cannot be deemed solely as a transfer of a
copy of a work, and therefore, any types of conditions contained in a
license – depending on the wording of the license – can be considered as
prerequisites for the copyright grant. Not observing the conditions
could be construed as losing the copyright grant and therefore resulting
in a copyright violation and not a mere contract violation.

### Waiver and liability {#sec_finland_Waiverandliability}

Typically, FOSS licenses contain very strong liability limitation
clauses which discharge the author from all liability. Most clauses
discharge all liability for quality faults in the software and many
clauses discharge liability for issues in the title to the FOSS, as
well. The reason for this is that FOSS is mostly made available without
a fee, and as a result, the author generates insufficient income to pay
for liability insurances and legal costs.[^154]

Where business models are built around FOSS, guarantees are often
offered against a fee or as a part of chargeable services.

There is no general requirement to offer warranties in (i) business to
business, (ii) individual to business, or (iii) individual to individual
relations. FOSS liability limitations can thus be considered valid. The
reasonableness of such provisions can be contested only on very rare
occasions. Since FOSS is mostly licensed without a fee, the
circumstances would have to be very exceptional in order for the claim
to be able to succeed on grounds of the provision being an unreasonable
contract term.

However, in a relationship between a business and an individual using
the product as a consumer, there are requirements as to different types
of faults in the product. These requirements apply to consumer products
but not to consumer services. Although computer software can be
considered as a consumer product in some cases (typically in
off-the-shelf proprietary software sales), this would not normally apply
to FOSS. In any case, since FOSS is normally not sold for a fee, and
even proprietary off-the-shelf copies often include full liability
limitations, the risk in that a liability limitation of a FOSS license
were to be deemed contrary to law or unreasonable can be seen as low.

The variance of licensing regimes does not affect the above analysis.
Product liability rules are generic and do not specifically react to
particular software licensing regimes.

### The copyleft principle {#sec_finland_Thecopyleftprinciple}

#### Principle {#_principle_2}

A characteristic found in different (but not all[^155]) FOSS licenses is
the so-called “copyleft” principle. FOSS licenses incorporating the
copyleft principle[^156] lay down as a license provision that in order
for the licensee to be entitled to further distribute the program with
his or her modifications, such modifications must be licensed under the
same terms as the original program. The extent of “modifications”
subject to the copyleft rule varies from license to license. In some
licenses only direct modifications of the files are considered
modifications, whereas in others any creation of a derivative work is
subject to the copyleft rule.

The copyleft principle may – depending on the case – restrict the
commercial uses of the software. Sometimes it is feared that copyleft
software could unintentionally cause the company’s copyrighted works to
become subject to a copyleft license. This is a misconception. The
sanctions for incorporating copyleft code in an unpermitted manner into
proprietary software are the same copyright law sanctions resulting from
unpermitted use of any copyrighted work.

#### Validity {#_validity_2}

As discussed above, copyleft clauses are as valid as any other clauses
in copyright licenses. Some copyleft clauses, however, are unclear or
ambiguous (notably in GPL version 2, especially regarding the question
of the extent of copyleft) and may therefore become subject to
interpretation.

### Compensations and damages {#sec_finland_CompensationsandDamages}

Copyright violations entitle the copyright holders to claim for
copyright-based compensation as well as damages. Copyright-based
compensation is typically set to a level equal to the license fee
charged for the infringing act had the license been lawfully acquired.
Damage, in turn, includes any damage occurring due to the infringement,
e.g., costs due to specialist work for inspecting the infringing acts.
In addition, legal and other costs are compensated, fully in principle,
but in practice only to a certain extent.

In the context of FOSS, the proper amount of copyright-based
compensation can be difficult to establish. If FOSS has been distributed
against the copyleft rule, the compensation would, in principle, be
equal to the license price the copyright holder would ask for such
distribution.

FOSS cases in Finland {#sec_finland_foasscases}
---------------------

No cases have been reported yet (November 2013).

Finnish case law on copyright to computer programs {#sec_finland_copycases}
--------------------------------------------------

The authors have followed and listed below Finnish case law relating to
copyright protection of computer programs up until November 2013. With
respect to precedents by the Supreme Court and opinions issued by the
Copyright Council, we believe the list is complete and exhaustive.
However, with regard to Appeal Court level case law, as well as
judgments apart from Supreme Court precedents, we have not been able to
perform exhaustive searches for such material. The decisions are in
Finnish with Swedish translations available for the Supreme Court
precedents.

### Supreme Court {#_supreme_court}

-   KKO:1996:43

-   KKO 2788/1997 (non-precedent)

-   KKO:1998:91

-   KKO:1999:115

-   KKO:2000:68

-   KKO:2003:88

-   KKO:2008:45

### Appeal courts {#_appeal_courts}

-   Appeal Court of Helsinki (Helsingin HO) 28.12.1999 3571

-   Appeal Court of Kouvola (Kouvolan HO) 31.10.2000 1064

-   Appeal Court of Helsinki (Helsingin HO) 08.06.2004 2133

-   Appeal Court of Vaasa (Vaasan HO) 17.5.2005 712. (The prosecutor
    obtained, and the Court concurred with, a Copyright Council opinion
    on copyright threshold in the matter, see TN 2003:10 below.)

-   Appeal Court of Helsinki (Helsingin HO) 20.06.2006 1891 (The
    plaintiff presented as evidence, and the Court concurred with, a
    Copyright Council opinion on the copyright threshold of a computer
    program, see TN 1997:2 below. Case decided by Supreme Court, see
    KKO:2008:45 above.)

-   Appeal Court of Turku (Turun HO) 17.02.2009 304

-   Appeal Court of Helsinki (Helsingin HO) 20.12.2010 3371

-   Appeal Court of Rovaniemi (Rovaniemen HO) 04.03.2011 204

### Copyright Council {#_copyright_council}

Opinions of the Copyright Council[^157] (in Finnish) can be accessed via
the following website:
<http://www.okm.fi/OPM/Tekijaenoikeus/tekijaenoikeusneuvosto/tekijaenoikeusneuvoston_lausunnot/>

+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| Decision no.       | Rubric (translated from Finnish)                       |
+====================+========================================================+
| TN 1986:3          | Object of protection                                   |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| TN 1989:7          | Copyright to computer program                          |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| TN 1992:3          | Copyright protection of video games                    |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| TN 1993:12         | Copyright to computer program                          |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| TN 1996:3          | Copyright of an author of a computer program           |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| TN 1997:12         | Copyright to computer program                          |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| TN 1997:17         | Exhaustion of copyright (etc.)                         |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| TN 1997:18         | Computer program for calculating preset values of      |
|                    | radiator valves                                        |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| TN 1998:13         | Paternity right of an author of a computer program     |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| TN 1998:16         | Copyright to computer programs                         |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| TN 1998:19         | Copyright to translations included in a computer       |
|                    | program                                                |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| TN 1999:4          | Right of a civilian service man to a computer program  |
|                    | created by him                                         |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| TN 2003:10         | Copyright to computer programs                         |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| TN 2005:7          | Copyright threshold and protection of a computer       |
|                    | program                                                |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| TN 2006:5          | Protection of a computer program                       |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| TN 2006:12         | Copyright threshold and protection of a computer       |
|                    | program                                                |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| TN 2007:3          | Copyright to a computer program created as (part of) a |
|                    | thesis                                                 |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| TN 2007:9          | Circumvention of an effective technological measure\*  |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| TN 2008:13         | Copyright to a musical application                     |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| TN 2009:15         | Renting of a computer program                          |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| TN 2011:15         | Copyright to an internet game and the idea thereof     |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+

`*` English translation available at
<http://www.okm.fi/export/sites/default/OPM/Tekijaenoikeus/tekijaenoikeusneuvosto/tekijaenoikeusneuvoston_lausunnot/2007/liitteet/TN_2007-9_edi_eng.pdf>

References and recommended literature {#_references_and_recommended_literature}
-------------------------------------

There are no wider literature presentations on Finnish copyright
legislation in English. The references here are to literature on
copyright in Finnish or Swedish, with a special emphasis on literature
touching upon issues related to computer programs.

### Books {#_books}

-   Haarmann, Pirkko-Liisa: Tekijänoikeus ja lähioikeudet. Talentum.
    Helsinki 2005.

-   Harenko, Kristiina – Niiranen, Valtteri – Tarkela, Pekka:
    Tekijänoikeus – kommentaari ja käsikirja. WSOYpro. Helsinki 2006.

-   Sorvari, Katariina: Vastuu tekijänoikeuden loukkauksesta
    erityisesti tietoverkkoympäristössä. WSOY. Vantaa 2005.

-   Takki, Pekka: IT-sopimukset – käytännön käsikirja. Kauppakaari.
    Helsinki 2003.

-   Välimäki, Mikko: Oikeudet tietokoneohjelmiin. Talentum.
    Helsinki 2009.

### Articles {#_articles}

-   Lehtonen, Asko: Kohtuullisen hyvityksen arviointi tietokoneohjelmaa
    koskevassa tekijänoikeuden loukkaustapauksessa. In (ed. Anne
    Kumpula): *Juhlajulkaisu Leena Kartio*. University of Turku 1998.

-   Pitkänen, Olli: Oikeudet tietokoneohjelmistoihin. In (ed. Eero
    Hyvönen): *Ohjelmistoliiketoiminta*. WSOY 2003.

-   Vedenkangas, Matti: Tietokoneohjelman luovutuksen luonne:
    tekijänoikeuden, käyttöoikeuden vaiko teoskappaleen luovutus.
    Defensor Legis 5/2002.

-   Oesch, Rainer – Vesala Juha: Ohjelmistolisenssit ja
    tekijänoikeuden raukeaminen. Defensor Legis 2/2004.

France {#chap.france}
======

author:\[Perbost,Fabrice\] author:\[Walter,Alan\]

Introduction to software protection under French law {#sec_introductionfrench}
----------------------------------------------------

### Body of law {#sec_bodyfrench}

Under article L. 112-2 of the French Intellectual Property Code,
software developments shall be considered as works of the mind and are,
as such, protected in France by copyright law.

The copyright protection of software is regulated by Law n° 94-361 of 10
May 1994, which implements Council Directive 91/250/EEC of 14 May 1991
on the legal protection of computer programs in France. It provides some
specific rules regarding software, which confirms and outlines the
applicability of the general principles of copyright law to such works.

### Scope of the protection {#sec_Scope_of_the_protection_france}

Under article L. 112-2 of the French Intellectual Property Code,
copyright law protects “software including preparatory design material”.
The Directive of 14 May 1991 defines such preparatory design material as
“preparatory design work leading to the development of a computer
program provided that the nature of the preparatory work is such that a
computer program can result from it at a later stage”.

Copyright law protects software that is original, regardless of its
kind, form of expression, merit or purpose. Thus, originality is the
sole criterion to consider when assessing whether a given piece of
software is subject to copyright protection, which implies that the
source and object code of software are protected in the same manner.

Generally, case law considers that a piece of software is original when
its author has brought a personal intellectual contribution[^158].

However, the ideas and principles, which underlie any element of
software, including those which underlie its interfaces, are not
protected by copyright.

### Authors/Beneficiaries {#sec_authorsfrance}

i.  As a rule, authorship shall belong to the natural person, who has
    created the software, whether the author is an employee or not.
    However, according to article L. 113-1 of the French Intellectual
    Property Code, it shall belong, unless otherwise proved, to the
    person or persons under whose name the work has been disclosed.

ii. Furthermore, article L. 113-9 of the French Intellectual Property
    Code provides that unless otherwise provided by statutory provisions
    or stipulations, the economic rights in the software and its
    documentation created by one or more employees in the execution of
    their duties or following the instructions given by their employer
    shall be the property of the employer and he exclusively shall be
    entitled to exercise them.\
    This provision also applies to the servants of the State, of local
    authorities and of public establishments of an
    administrative nature.

iii. Software created by two or more persons may be a “collective work”
    or a “collaborative work”.

    A collaborative work is a work in the creation of which more than
    one natural person has participated. It shall be the joint property
    of its authors.

    It differs from a collective work, which is a work created at the
    initiative of a natural or legal person, who edits it, publishes it
    and discloses it under his direction and name and in which the
    personal contributions of the various participating authors are
    merged in the overall work for which they were conceived, without it
    being possible to attribute to each author a separate right in the
    work as created. It shall be the property, unless otherwise proved,
    of the natural or legal person under whose name it has
    been disclosed.

iv. When a work integrates a preexisting work, without the collaboration
    of the author of the latter work, it is defined as a
    “Composite work”. A composite work shall be the property of the
    author who has produced it, subject to the rights of the author of
    the preexisting work, which means that the author of the composite
    work has to (a) obtain the consent of the author of the integrated
    work for such integration and (b) share the remuneration derived
    from the composite work with the author of the integrated work.

### Exclusive rights {#sec_exclusivefrench}

According to article L. 122-6 of the French Intellectual Property Code,
the patrimonial rights belonging to the author of the software shall
include the right to do or to authorize:

-   any permanent or temporary reproduction of software by any means and
    in any form, in part or in whole;

-   any translation, adaptation, arrangement or any other alteration of
    software and the reproduction of the results thereof; and

-   any form of distribution to the public, including the rental, of the
    original software or of copies thereof.

The right of performance, as defined by article L 122-2 of the French
Intellectual Property Code, which is attached to any literary and
artistic work, is not expressly mentioned among the exclusive rights of
the author of a piece of software. However, this is not to say that the
software author does not enjoy such a right, which could apply to
software under certain circumstances, such as a filmed execution or an
online execution.

Reproduction shall consist of the physical fixation of a work by any
process allowing its communication to the public in an indirect way.
This may be through copying or recording onto any media. Insofar as
loading, displaying, running, transmitting or storing the software
necessitate such reproduction, such acts require the consent of the
author.

### Exceptions to exclusive rights {#sec_exceptions_france}

Similarly to the general copyright rules, the third paragraph of article
L. 122-6 of the French Intellectual Property Code provides that the
first sale of a copy of software on the territory of a Member State of
the European Community or of a State party to the agreement on the
European Economic Area by the author or with his consent shall exhaust
the right of placing on the market of that copy in all Member States,
with the exception of the right to authorize further rental of a copy.

Considering the specificity of software, article L. 122-6-1 also
provides some exceptions to the exclusive rights of the author.

The acts referred in article L. 122-6 shall not require the permission
of the author where they are necessary for the use of the software by
the person entitled to use it in accordance with its intended purpose,
including for error correction, unless otherwise specified in the
contract. This means that the person entitled to use the program can
copy it into his computer in order to run it.

A person having the right to use the software may make a backup copy
where such is necessary to ensure use of the software.

A person having the right to use the software shall be entitled, without
the permission of the author, to observe, study or test the functioning
of the software in order to determine the ideas and principles, which
underlie any element of the software if he does so while performing any
of the acts of loading, displaying, running, transmitting or storing the
software, which he is entitled to do.

Reproduction of the code of the software or translation of the form of
that code shall not require the permission of the author where
reproduction or translation within the meaning of article L. 122-6 is
indispensable for obtaining the information necessary to achieve the
interoperability of independently created software with other software.

However, it is expressly provided that these exceptions to the exclusive
rights shall neither prejudice the normal exploitation of the software
nor cause unreasonable prejudice to the author’s legitimate interests.

Any stipulation contrary to the provisions of article L. 122-6-1 shall
be null and void.

### Moral rights {#sec_moral_french}

The moral rights of the author generally include (i) the right to
disclose his work, (ii) the right of respect for his name and his work
and (iii) the right of withdrawal.

However, the Intellectual Property Code contains some specific rules
limiting the extent of the moral rights over software. It provides that,
except for any stipulation more favorable to him, the author may not (i)
oppose to modifications of the software, as far as such modifications do
not affect his honor or reputation, and/or (ii) exercise his right of
withdrawal.

In the absence of any specific provision regarding the right of
disclosure, opinion suggests that such right shall apply to software.

Moral rights are perpetual, inalienable and imprescriptible, which means
that an author cannot waive his moral rights on a literary or artistic
work or transfer them to a third person.

However, the moral rights may be subject to contractual waivers,
provided that such waivers are special and limited. For example, an
author can decide not to disclose his identity. The clauses imposing the
preservation of the author’s anonymity are valid, as long as the author
does not permanently waive his right of paternity. An anonymous author
may reveal his paternity at any time.

### Term of protection {#sec_protection_france}

According to article L. 123-1 of the French Intellectual Property Code,
the author shall enjoy, during his lifetime and for 70 years after his
death, the exclusive right to exploit his work in any form whatsoever
and to derive monetary profit therefrom.

In the case of collaborative works, the calendar year taken into account
for the calculation of the 70 years following death shall be that of the
death of the last surviving joint author.

In the case of collective works, the term of the exclusive right shall
be 70 years from January 1 of the calendar year following that in which
the work was published. This rule also applies to works produced
anonymously or under a pseudonym.

Finally, a composite work is protected regardless of the preexisting
work, even if the preexisting work has entered the public domain[^159].

### Copyright assignment {#_copyright_assignment}

Article L. 131-1 of the French Intellectual Property Code provides that
the complete assignment of intellectual property rights in future works
shall be null and void.

According to the general regime for literary and artistic works,
assignment of the exclusive rights on software may be total or partial.
The assigned rights shall be “separately mentioned in the instrument of
assignment and the field of exploitation of the assigned rights being
defined as to its scope and purpose, as to place and as to
duration”[^160].

Contrary to the general regime, which imposes that the remuneration of
an author be proportional to the revenues derived from the sale or
exploitation of his work, article L. 131-4 of the French Intellectual
Property Code provides that the remuneration due to the author of
software in compensation for the assignment of his rights can be
calculated as a lump sum.

The assignment may always be done for free, considering the interest of
the author to release its work and have it brought to the knowledge of
the public.

### Special measures {#_special_measures_2}

Law n° 2006-961 of 1st August 2006, which implements Council Directive
2001/29/EC of 22nd May 2001 on the harmonization of certain aspects of
copyright and related rights in the information society, provides some
specific rules regarding software.

Besides, general measures provided by the Intellectual Property Code to
enforce copyright, article L. 335-2-1 provides for penalties against any
person offering to the public a computer program aimed at providing
public access to protected works without authorization.

In addition, pursuant to article L. 331-5, right holders may implement
technological measures designed to prevent or restrict actions that they
have not authorized. This article also provides legal protection against
the circumvention of effective technological measures and against the
provision of devices, products or services to this effect. Nevertheless,
the article specifies that it is not applicable to the technological
measures used in connection with software.

Unprotected software and public domain software {#sec_publicdomain_french}
-----------------------------------------------

As previously discussed, only original software is protected by
copyright.

The original nature of software has been the subject of numerous debates
on principles and in courtrooms. The notion of originality, which is
traditionally defined as a reflection of an author’s personality, is
difficult to apply to a technical work like software.

Some authors agree that such reflection of an author’s personality
through software would mainly reside in “the choice to use one or
several possible methods, fulfilled in the final program”[^161].

In this respect, the full assembly of the Court of Cassation held that
software was original if it contained the “intellectual contribution of
the author and that originality extended to a personal effort over and
above the simple implementation of a restrictive and automatic software
and that the realization of said effort resulted in an individualized
structure”[^162].

Software that fails to meet this criterion is not liable to protection
under copyright law. This is the case for “applets”, for example, which
are used for web animation. Such software can be freely executed,
reproduced and modified without the author’s permission.

Software that comes into the public domain may also be freely used and
reproduced. Given the length of protection afforded under French
copyright law it can safely be considered that, at present, no software
has yet come into the public domain.

It can be questioned whether software can, at the author’s desire, be
created directly in the public domain. Contrary to free licenses, public
domain licenses are supposed to make the work in question as freely
accessible as if that work had come into the public domain. They suppose
that the author has renounced all rights over the software. This type of
license would appear to be possible as far as the author may freely
waive his patrimonial rights. The use of the software would, however, be
subject to the respect of the moral rights of the author.

Analysis of FOSS under French law {#sec_analysisfrench}
---------------------------------

Free software licenses have once been defined as “licenses through which
the author allows the copy, modification and distribution of the work
modified or not, concurrently, without transferring the author’s
copyright and without the user being able to limit the rights attached
to the original work and any derivatives thereof”[^163].

Hence, free software is not free of all rights. It is in fact protected
by copyright, but its source code may be freely executed and modified by
its user community. Depending on the type of license under which the
software was released (which may — or may not — include a copyleft), the
members of such user communities are — or are not — obligated to
disclose any modifications or improvements they made and communicate the
corresponding source codes to other users. For these reasons, many
authors favor the “Open Source Software” designation over that of “Free
Software”, as they find it more expressive and understandable.

The determination and the expression of rights between different
contributors will depend on the qualification given to the work.

### FOSS definitions {#sec_defs_french}

In accordance with the principle of free modification of software
distributed under a free license, a certain number of persons will
contribute to the evolution of the original software. The modified
software may then be defined as a collaborative work, a collective work
or a composite work.

The term “collective work” is applicable if the creation and the
disclosure of the software are carried out under the direction of the
initial author of the software. This definition allows the latter to
benefit from all rights attached to the software to the detriment of the
successive contributors.

The term “collaborative work” could also be used. However, in such case,
a concerted action on the part of all contributors is required — an
idea, which seems incompatible with the very nature of a free license.
Certain authors consider that this definition is the one that comes the
closest to the spirit of free work. Indeed, it has the advantage of
taking “the global evolving work and the equality of the authors”[^164]
into account. The use of this definition does, however, raise
difficulties, as it offers an indivisible right over the work to each of
the authors.

The final possibility is the definition as a derivative or composite
work. According to this definition, each original modification of the
software gives rise to a distinct version of the preceding work. It
allows the rights of each contributor to be clearly defined, provided
that each modification made to the original software can indeed be
individualized. This definition is the most commonly admitted in
principle[^165]. It is also the one that appears to have been accepted
by the Court of Paris, in a decision dated 28 March 2007[^166].

None of the definitions given by the Intellectual Property Code fully
accounts for the specific nature of free software, due in particular to
its evolutionary character resulting from the unusual granting of a
right to modify to all users. The remainder of the current paper is
based upon the most commonly admitted definition for open source
software, namely that of a derivative work.

### Copyright {#_copyright}

The evolutionary character of free software makes the definition of each
author and contributor’s rights extremely complicated. Literary and
artistic ownership, which grants the author a monopoly over the
exploitation of the work, is effectively difficult to reconcile with the
freedoms of use and modification that govern free software in practice.

The definition of free software as a succession of derived works allows
the author of each modification to be clearly defined, together with the
scope of his rights. Each contributor adding original modifications to
the software thus creates an independent work from the modified work.
Consequently he enjoys all moral and patrimonial rights pertaining
thereto.

Under these circumstances it is important to distinguish the rights of
the initial author from those of the contributors.

The initial author is free to determine the fate of his patrimonial
rights. Contrary to moral rights, patrimonial rights may be assigned in
whole or in part, gifted, or licensed. Nothing prevents the author from
assigning or awarding operating permissions free of charge[^167]. This
gratuitous nature is in accordance with article L. 122-7 of the
Intellectual Property Code, which provides that “the right of
performance and the right of reproduction may be transferred, for or
without payment”. It is therefore up to the author to decide whether to
license free uses of his work.

Law n°2006-961 of August 2006 on the droits d’auteur and related rights
in the information society, introduced, among others, a new article L.
122-7-1 into the Intellectual Property Code in response to the
legislator’s wish that the development of the “free” movement be taken
into consideration. This article states that “the author is free to
provide his work to the public free of charge subject to the rights of
any future co-authors and third parties as well as in respect of any
conventions, which he may conclude”. The “free of charge” provision is
thus admitted in French law and has been acknowledged by courts[^168].

However, it would appear arguable, under copyright law, whether
so-called copyleft licenses compel contributors to give up their own
patrimonial rights over the work in order that others may freely copy,
modify or distribute the program. This assignment of a future right
disregards the fundamental right of the author to exploit his work.

Moreover, article L. 131-3 of the Intellectual Property Code imposes a
duty to mention each assignment separately in the instrument of
assignment and to define the field of exploitation of the assigned
rights as to its scope and purpose. Case law has thus consistently held
that general assignment clauses are invalid[^169]. The application of
this provision to software and licenses entails that a free license
granting the rights to copy, distribute and modify with no further
precision, such as the BSD license[^170], should be considered null and
void. In practice, the principle of strict interpretation of contracts
shall reduce the scope of such permissions to the methods of
exploitation defined in the contract.

However, case law has shown proof of flexibility in this field. Certain
decisions have been based on the real will of the parties[^171] or
actual use[^172] in order to validate an assignment and to appreciate
its scope.

### Moral copyrights {#_moral_copyrights_2}

The mechanisms of free licenses are based on the freedom for licensees
to use and to freely modify software. This freedom is liable to clash
with the moral rights of the author and those of the different
contributors.

#### Right to disclose {#_right_to_disclose}

The author of the initial software exercises his right to disclose
through his decision to distribute the software under a free license. He
thus authorizes all modes of disclosure of the work, namely copying,
distribution and modification.

Licensees also enjoy a personal right to disclose over their own
contributions, where such contributions are of an original character.
The scope of such right depends on the conditions of the license under
which the software is disclosed.

Certain licenses require that the modified software be disclosed under
the same license. Such licenses are known as “Copyleft”.

With copyleft licenses the licensee may elect whether or not to disclose
his modifications, but cannot decide the conditions of such disclosure.
The author of the modified software’s disclosure rights are thus
considerably limited. However, this limitation of rights does not seem
to call the principles of copyright law into question considering that,
while the composite work is the property of its author, its exploitation
remains subject to the rights of the author of the preexisting work. The
author of the original software may therefore define the conditions
under which his work is disclosed without affecting the moral rights of
future contributors.

The disclosure rights granted to contributors by licenses without
copyleft are much more flexible. The contributors are free to use and
modify the software without being bound to subject their modified work
to the conditions of a given license.

#### Paternity rights {#_paternity_rights}

Paternity rights over the initial or modified software are not treated
uniformly by all free licenses.

Copyleft licenses are extremely detailed on paternity issues for
successive authors.

For example, the GPL license[^173], which is the best known and most
widely used free license, requires contributors to indicate their names
and to specify the modifications they made to the work to avoid any
mistaken attribution to a third party. As a result, anonymity rights,
which result from paternity rights, cannot be exercised when the
software is distributed under a license of this kind.

#### Right of integrity {#_right_of_integrity}

Free licenses allow any person, who accepts the terms thereof to modify
the work.

According to software law, the author of the software cannot object to
modifications unless such modifications harm his honor or reputation.
Modifications made to correct or develop a program without the author’s
permission are thus valid.

However, prior authorization of any and all kinds of modifications to
the software by third parties is contrary to the right of integrity of
the work. Indeed, case law underlines the “inalienable right of respect
for work, a public order principle, which is opposed to the author
abandoning or assigning in a premature or general manner the exclusive
enjoyment of use, distribution, withdrawal, addition and changes, which
this latter may like to carry out”[^174]. Any software modification may
therefore expose its author to a future action based on the right to
respect for the original work.

### Enforcing FOSS licenses {#_enforcing_foss_licenses_2}

#### Contractual organization {#_contractual_organization}

The originality of the distribution of free licenses lies in the fact
that the author does not simply disclose his work; he also organizes the
use which can be made thereof. He thus allows, through contract and
under certain conditions, the copying, transmission and modification of
the software he created. Any and all persons accepting such conditions
enter into a contractual relationship with the author.

The license agreement thus establishes a contractual relationship
between the licensees and the initial author. Each licensee who modifies
the work by virtue of the permission granted by the initial author
enjoys copyright protection for his original contributions. He may then
grant the same freedoms over his contributions. Users of the modified
work would then find themselves contractually bound, not only to the
initial author but also to the authors of subsequent modifications.

In theory users of the modified work must have permission to use and
modify the work, not only from the initial author but also from all
authors of subsequent modifications.

This being said, certain licenses, such as the GPL, specify that rights
over the modified work be granted only by the initial author to the
detriment of the rights of other contributors.

#### Validity of the agreement {#_validity_of_the_agreement}

The validity of such licenses can be called into question under basic
contract law, or under consumer laws.

From a contract law perspective, it should be noted that free software
is generally subject to standard licenses, which are real subscription
contracts (“take it or leave it”). Acceptance of the license is often by
tacit agreement, demonstrated by the carrying out of certain actions
allowed by the author. Indeed, it is consistently accepted by the courts
that the performance of an agreement may constitute acceptance of an
offer.[^175]

Turning to consumer laws, numerous standards are contrary to this type
of license. Consequently, should the licensee be a consumer or a
non-professional (as defined by French case law), a certain number of
clauses — such as those excluding all guarantees or those limiting or
excluding the developer’s liability[^176] — could automatically be
considered abusive.

Certain licenses could also find themselves in breach of the French law
imposing the use of the French language (generally referred to as the
“Toubon law”)[^177], which may lead to the payment of fines and/or the
unenforceability of such licenses.

Likewise, certain licenses do not comply with the rules regulating
online agreements (e.g. prior information of the licensee; “double
click” requirement to express acceptance…empty)[^178], which may lead to
the unenforceability of such licenses.

In spite of these notions of French law, the Court of Appeal of Paris
indirectly acknowledged the validity of such free licenses in a decision
dated 16th September 2009[^179].

#### Breach of license conditions {#_breach_of_license_conditions}

Failure to comply with the provisions of a license constitutes a breach
by the licensee of his contractual obligations as well as a breach of
the copyright rules.

With copyleft licenses, the free use of software is subject to the
condition that the user releasing a modified version of the software
allows free access to the modified source code and its further
modification to third parties. According to Professor Gautier, this is a
sort of condition subsequent to the legal act, which is generally stated
in the license terms[^180]. If the contributor fails to comply with the
terms of the license, the license is automatically revoked by his fault,
without prejudice to any future claims on grounds of piracy by the
original author.

On that basis, the Court of Appeal of Paris in a decision dated 16th
September 2009, pronounced the revocation of a contract for a violation
of the license conditions: a free software was used by a licensee as a
basis for the development of an application, but the licensee removed
the original copyright notice referring to the authors of the two files
and replaced them with his own, removed the contents of the license
under which the original software was released and failed to provide the
source code of his modified version of the free software. The Court of
Appeal therefore held that several conditions of the GNU GPL had not
been complied with.

### Waiver and liability {#_waiver_and_liability_2}

The majority of free licenses includes a limitation or exemption of
liability. This is the case with GNU and Mozilla licenses, for example.
The question arises as to the validity of such licenses under French
law.

Article 1150 of the French Civil Code allows for the limitation of
contractual liability. Such limitations are valid in the absence of
gross negligence or fraud, in as far as they are agreed between
professionals.

Looking at consumer law, clauses “excluding or limiting the
non-professional or consumer’s legal rights in the event of a failure by
the professional to comply with any of his obligations” are
unquestionably deemed abusive and consequently held to be null and void,
potentially leading the distributor and/or the editor to be considered
fully liable for all direct damages[^181]. In order to determine the
validity of such clauses, it is therefore necessary to determine the
status of who modifies the software source code: professional or
consumer.

Finally, there is the question of liability for defective products in
the realm of free software[^182], whereby the producer is automatically
responsible for any material damage or personal injury caused by a
defect in his product. Opinion is divided on this point, as to whether
such liability can be applied to software. Some authors consider that
the law only applies to material products and that article 1386-3 of the
French Civil Code was not intended to include products of intellectual
origin[^183]. It is not impossible that case law will extend the scope
of the law to include intangibles.

Where it is admitted that software falls within the scope of liability
for defective products, this will only concern professional suppliers.
The independent developer, whose profession is not to supply software,
is therefore not concerned. The professional developer could take refuge
behind the principle of “development risk”, which would allow for an
exclusion of liability, as far as the professional may prove that the
state of scientific and technical knowledge did not allow the existence
of the defect to be known at the time that the product came into
circulation. It is within this meaning that the warranty clause in the
CeCILL license has been produced[^184].

FOSS Cases in France {#sec.fossfrance}
--------------------

Although it can be said that the free domain relatively generates few
cases of litigation, users of free software are nevertheless subject to
rules governing use and distribution. Developers and other organizations
involved with free software no longer hesitate before pursuing users,
who fail to comply with the conditions of applicable licenses,
particularly in matters of distribution.

Three cases have come before the French courts.

1.  The first case before the High Court of Paris in November 2008
    concerned a claim brought against the access provider Free, by three
    free software developers. The latter accused Free of distributing
    the Freebox (the modem provided by the ISP to its customers),
    containing free software components, in breach of the terms of the
    associated GPL license. The courts have not yet published a decision
    on this case.

2.  The second concerns the CNRS, in a case brought by Educaffix[^185].
    The latter company had concluded software transfer agreements with
    several higher education establishments and the CNRS. The
    transferred software could, however, only work with a free piece of
    software, JATLite, developed by the University of Stanford under GNU
    GPL license. Educaffix requested that the contract be declared null
    and void for fraud on the basis that CNRS had concealed the fact
    that the existence of the free software included in the transfer
    agreement required permission from a third party holder of the
    rights over said free software, in this case the University
    of Stanford. Further, Educaffix requested that the contract be
    revoked for the sole fault of CNRS because the exploitation of the
    transferred software implied by necessity the commission of an act
    of piracy over the free software.

    The Court held that “this program has the particular feature of
    depending on a GNU license, which allows free use of the software,
    but requires a license if the work based on the program can not
    reasonably be identified as independent and must therefore be
    considered as a derivative of the JATLite program.”

    This decision constitutes an application of the provisions of the
    GNU license and refers to, without directly citing, article 2 of the
    GNU license according to which “these requirements apply to the
    modified work as a whole. If identifiable sections of that work are
    not derived from the Program and can reasonably be considered
    independent and separate works in themselves, then this License, and
    its terms, shall not apply to those sections when one distributes
    them as separate works. Although, should one distribute the same
    sections as part of a whole based on the Program, the distribution
    of the whole must be placed under the terms of this License, whose
    permissions to other licensees extend to the whole, and thus to each
    and any of its parts, regardless of who wrote them”. Through this
    decision, the judges recognized the contaminant nature of GNU GPL on
    a derived program.

    It should be noted, however, that the decision does not recognize
    the validity of the GNU-GPL license, as far as it would have been up
    to the holder of the rights (University of Stanford, or transferee)
    to act on the legal principle of piracy and to request the
    recognition of its rights, which was not the case here.

3.  The validity of the GNU GPL license was finally recognized in a
    decision issued by the Court of Appeal of Paris dated 16
    September 2009.

    In this case the National Association for Adult Education (AFPA)
    issued a call for tenders for the implementation of learning spaces,
    which was finally granted to EDU 4. Doubting the sincerity of the
    offer submitted by EDU 4, AFPA declared the contract terminated. EDU
    4 felt that the product they delivered matched the expectations and
    sued AFPA for abusive breach of contract, which claim was upheld by
    the High Court of Bobigny in 2004.

    Before the Court of Appeal, AFPA claimed that EDU4 had not clearly
    informed them that a free piece of software had been incorporated
    into the provided solution, that the copyright mentions relating to
    this piece of software had been modified and that the text of the
    GNU-GPL license had been removed. The Court of Appeal of Paris
    upheld the claims made by AFPA and held that EDU4 had failed to
    comply with the terms of the GNU license.

    This decision is important because it was feared that France, one of
    the countries with the highest levels of copyright protection, would
    deem the free license to be null and void. It also reminds
    developers, who have decided to integrate free software that this
    decision is not without consequences and that a free software is not
    a software free of rights.

Legal procedures {#sec_france_procedures}
----------------

Free software developers enjoy several methods of ensuring the
compliance with their rights. They can act on the basis of contract law
or copyright law.

On the basis of contract law, where one of the parties to a license
agreement fails to perform his obligations, the other party may sue to
demand the execution of the promised obligations[^186] or the
termination of the agreement[^187]. That party may also claim damages
where the execution becomes impossible or where the failure by the
licensee to carry out his obligations has resulted in repairable
damages.

On the basis of copyright law, failure by the licensee to comply with
the terms of the license is tantamount to piracy. Effectively, article
L. 335-3 of the Intellectual Property Code states that “the crime of
piracy is the violation of one of the rights of the author of a piece of
software, as defined at article L. 122-6”. Any and all reproduction,
representation, distribution, modification, or marketing of software
without the consent of its author is a civil tort and a criminal
offense. As a result, the licensee can take action in civil and criminal
courts to ensure the compliance with his rights. Before criminal courts,
the pirate risks up to 3 years in prison and fines of up to 300,000
Euros[^188].

### Recommended literature {#_recommended_literature}

#### Opinion {#_opinion}

-   S. Basset and Ch. Bigot, Les logiciels open source : quel statut
    juridique ?, Cahier Lamy droit de l’informatique et des réseaux,
    April 2003, n° 157, p. 26

-   Ch. Caron, Les licences de logiciels dits “libres” à l'épreuve du
    droit français, D. 2003, p. 1556

-   M. Clément-Fontaine, Les oeuvres libres, Thèse, Montpellier, 2006

-   M. Clément Fontaine, Licence Publique Générale GNU (GNU GPL),
    Mémoire DEA, Montpellier, 1999

-   Y. Dietrich, Logiciels Opensource : une réalité juridique au sein
    des entreprises, RLDI, April 2005, n° 4, p. 28

-   P. Gaudillère, Licences de logiciels libres et risques
    juridiques, Comm. Com. Electr. 2005, étude 16

-   Ph. Gilliéron, Open Source et droit des brevets, RLDI, February
    2007, n° 24, p. 67

-   B. Jean and A. Zapolsky, La propriété intellectuelle dans
    l’industrie de l’open source (1ère partie), Gaz. Pal., 24-25 October
    2008, p. 19

-   B. Jean and A. Zapolsky, La propriété intellectuelle dans
    l’industrie de l’open source (2ème partie), Gaz. Pal., 23-24 January
    2009, p. 15

-   C Rojinsky and V. Grynbaum, Les licences libres et le droit
    français, Propr. Intell. 2004, n° 4, p. 28

-   B. de Roquefeuil and M. Bougeaois, Logiciel libre et licence CeCILL,
    une transposition fidèle des principes de la licence GNU GPL dans un
    contrat de droit français, Gaz. Pal. 2005, chron. P. 915

-   L. Schurr, La licence GNU/GPL (V3) a presque deux ans : un bilan
    mitigé, Gaz. Pal., 22 and 23 April 2009, p. 9

#### Case law {#_case_law}

-   TGI Paris, 28 March 2007, Educaffix c/ CNRS, Gaz. Pal., n° 22, 22
    January 2008, p. 35

-   CA Paris, 16 September 2009, RG n° 01/24298, SA EDU 4 c/ Association
    AFPA

Germany {#chap.Germany}
=======

author:\[Engelhardt,Tim\] author:\[Jaeger,Till\]

Introduction to software protection under German law {#sec_introductiongerman}
----------------------------------------------------

### Body of law {#sec_bodygerman}

In Germany, the Copyright Act[^189] is the primary legislative regime
providing legal protection to software. Its key provisions relevant for
software are sections 69a through 69g. They were included in order to
implement the so-called EU Software Directive[^190] into German national
law, and their language is almost identical with that of the EU
directive. However, insofar as there are no contradictions or unless the
act provides otherwise, the general rules of the Copyright Act (i.e., on
the transfer of rights, the legal consequences of infringements, etc.)
apply to software as well.[^191]

### Object of protection {#sec_objectgerman}

Following the understanding of the Berne Convention for the Protection
of Literary and Artistic Works and the framework of the Software
Directive, computer programs (including the preparatory material) are
literary works. According to UrhG, sec. 69a para 3, only original
computer programs are protected under copyright law.[^192] This means
that the computer program needs to be the author’s “own intellectual
creation”. Sec. 69a para 2 sentence 2 of the Copyright Act explicitly
states that the ideas and principles underlying any element of a
computer program, including those which underlie its interfaces, do not
enjoy copyright protection.

But what does “the author’s own intellectual creation” mean? First, the
term “intellectual” refers to the condition that the computer program
must have been created by a human being and not a machine. Thus,
programs that are entirely computer-generated are not protected under
copyright law.[^193] The only other prerequisite is that the creation
must be the author’s “own”. According to German case law and literature,
this confirms that the threshold for awarding copyright protection to
computer programs is low.[^194] Hence, the creation does not need to be
exceptionally original, it is sufficient if the program has certain
specific characteristics that are not trivial or entirely banal.[^195]
The Federal Court of Justice held in a decision from 2005 that there is
even a presumption for sufficient individuality if a computer program is
complex.[^196] This ruling has consequences in cases where the
copyrightability of a program is disputed. The creator of the program
has only to show that this program is complex, whereupon the opponent
has the full burden to show and prove that the program is in fact not
individual enough.

### Authors/Beneficiaries {#sec_authorsgerman}

Generally, all rights in a work belong to the actual author. Sec. 69b of
the Copyright Act, a special provision on the ownership of the rights on
computer programs, does not defer from this principle, but stipulates
that where a computer program is created by an employee in the execution
of her duties or following her employer’s instructions, the employer
shall be exclusively entitled to exercise all economic rights in the
program created, unless otherwise provided for by contract. Other than
under the work made for hire doctrine, which is well-established in the
USA, for instance sec. 69b does not provide for a fiction of authorship
to the benefit of a developer’s employer, but maintains the principle
that only the actual creator of a work can be considered its author.
However, sec. 69b achieves the goal of easing the exploitation of
computer programs made by larger developer groups hired by software
companies by a statutory grant of all necessary economic rights in the
software. The original authors are thus confined to assert their moral
rights in very special situations.[^197]

For an analysis of joint authorship, derivative works, compound works,
and collective works see below.[^198]

### Exclusive rights {#sec_exclusivegerman}

The right holder’s exclusive rights are set out in UrhG, sec. 69c, which
implements the specifications of sec. 4 of the Software Directive: the
author of a computer program has the exclusive right to reproduce the
computer program by any means and in any form; to translate, adapt,
arrange or otherwise alter the program; to distribute the program
including to rent and lend the program; and to communicate it to the
public. Distribution means any act by which a *physical copy* of the
work is put into circulation or any offer to the public to distribute
such a copy. It includes the right to rent physical copies of the work.
In contrast to the distribution right, the right to communicate a work
to the public covers only acts by which the owner does not transfer
physical copies of the work. From a practical point of view, among the
several rights that are sub-categories of the right to communicate a
program to the public (such as the right of recitation, performance and
presentation, broadcasting, communication by means of video or audio
recordings, etc.), only the making available to the public right is
relevant. It covers acts where a work is made available to the public in
such a way that members of the public may access it from a place and at
a time individually chosen by them, e.g., offering a work for download
and software-as-a-service.

### Exceptions to exclusive rights {#_exceptions_to_exclusive_rights_2}

Sec. 69c no. 3 sentence 2 of the Copyright Act sets forth the principle
of exhaustion. According to this provision, the distribution right is
exhausted whenever a copy of a computer program is put into circulation
by way of sale[^199] within the territory of the European Communities or
in another Contracting State of the Convention Concerning the European
Economic Area[^200] with the consent of the right holder, with the
exception of the rental right. Whether this applies only to the physical
distribution of software (that is, on data storage media) or whether the
principle of exhaustion also applies to online transmissions was highly
disputed in German legal circles until recently. The problem was that
the language of sec. 69c no. 3 sentence 2 seems to require that the
rights holders themselves put a copy of the program into (physical)
distribution, whereas in cases where the program is made available for
download, it is the downloading recipient of the software, rather than
the right holder who creates the physical copy. Hence, interpreting the
above provision narrowly would mean that it could not be applied to
making-available situations, as the right holder would not “put a copy
of the program into circulation”.[^201] However, as it appears odd to
disadvantage the more efficient, faster, and commonly used distribution
channel of downloading, a number of scholars and courts have opined that
exhaustion is also possible where a copy of a program was made by its
downloading recipient.[^202] According to this approach, the recipient
would be entitled to give away this copy to anyone else, provided that
she deletes from her systems all copies of the program she has made. On
3 July 2012, the Court of Justice of the European Union has, in its
*UsedSoft* decision, recognized the so-called "online exhaustion".[^203]
Applying the principles established in that decision, the German Federal
Court of Justice held in 2013 that the owner of a copy of a computer
program downloaded by her may give that program to a third party if the
following conditions are met: (1) the original owner paid a fee to the
copyright holder for receiving her program copy; (2) the original
owner’s license was not limited in time; and (3) the original owner’s
program copy must be made unusable. Moreover, any improvements and
updates the copy the new owner receives may contain must be covered by a
maintenance agreement between the copyright holder and the original
owner of the copy of the computer program.[^204]

Equally contentious, and in its details certainly not easy to
understand, are the exceptions provided for in UrhG, sec. 69d and 69e.
Their origin is, not surprisingly, the Software Directive. The
exceptions are intended to balance the interests of protection for
software developing companies on the one hand, and the interests of
users in maintaining the usability of their copies of the program and in
developing new compatible programs on the other.

According to UrhG, sec. 69d para 1, users of a computer program do not
need to obtain a license for the reproduction and alteration of the
software if these acts are necessary for the use of the program in
accordance with its intended purpose and the user is entitled to use a
copy of the program.[^205] The provision specifically points out that
error corrections can be allowed without the need to receive a license.
Confusingly, the paragraph also contains language stating that the
exercise of these rights is subject to the condition of no specific
contractual provisions stipulating otherwise. Does this mean that sec.
69d para 1 can be fully waived? The prevailing opinion in Germany
answers this question in the negative, saying that sec. 69d para 1
contains a core of exceptions that may not be forgone.[^206] The German
Federal Court of Justice confirmed this opinion in *UsedSoft II*.

In addition, the requirement of an “intended purpose” poses manifold
problems that are beyond the scope of this chapter. UrhG, sec. 69d para
2 allows lawful users of a copy of a computer program to make a back-up
copy insofar as it is necessary to ensure future use, even if
contractual obligations of the owner of the copy with the right holder
provide otherwise.

Sec.69d para 3 of the Copyright Act contains an interesting rule, giving
lawful users of a copy of a computer program the right to observe,
study, or test the functioning of the program “in order to determine the
ideas and principles which underlie any element of the program if she
does so while performing any of the acts of loading, displaying,
running, transmitting or storing the program which she is entitled to
do.” UrhG, sec. 69d para 2 and 3 may not be overridden by contract, as
UrhG, sec. 69g para 2 unequivocally states.

The same is true for the rule set out by UrhG, sec. 69e. According to
this provision, authorization of the right holder is not necessary when
the reproduction of a program and its translation into another form,
including the decompilation, is indispensable to obtain the information
necessary to achieve the interoperability of an independently created
computer program with other programs, if certain conditions are
met.[^207]

### Moral rights {#_moral_rights}

German copyright traditionally recognizes strong moral rights of the
authors of protected works. In principle, this is also true for
copyrighted software. Moral rights are not within the scope of the EU
Software Directive: thus, the general rules of German copyright law on
moral rights apply that is, in particular, UrhG, sec. 12 through
14.[^208] However, there is much discussion about the extent to which
authors of computer programs enjoy moral rights. It appears that the
tendency is to award them less protection than to authors of “classical”
works protected by copyright law.[^209]

Sec. 12 gives authors the right to decide whether and how their works
are to be published. Its practical importance for software is
negligible.

Sec. 13 grants authors the right of recognition of their authorship
(sentence 1), and the right to decide whether the work is to bear an
author’s designation and what kind of designation that should be
(sentence 2). The prevailing view is that an author may not completely
waive his right of recognition[^210], even in an employer-employee
relationship.[^211] On the other hand, authors may renounce their right
to be expressly named on each copy of the software.[^212] This can be
done impliedly for instance, if the author was aware of a business
practice that does not list the actual developers.[^213]

Sec. 14 provides for the right to prohibit any distortion of an author’s
work which would jeopardize her legitimate intellectual or personal
interest in the work. Examples could include the use of a work in a
certain way that could negatively reflect on the author’s reputation,
such as the use of the work in a racist or pornographic context, or the
distribution of versions of the work in particularly bad quality.

In addition, the recognition of moral rights has a strong impact on the
possibilities to assign or grant rights in copyrighted works. For
details, see the “Copyright assignment” section below.

### Term of protection {#_term_of_protection_2}

For computer programs, the same provisions on the protection term apply
as for works of literature and art: the copyright expires 70 years as of
January 1 following the death of the author (UrhG, sec. 64, 69). If a
work was created by joint authors, the 70-year period is calculated from
the date of the death of the last surviving author (UrhG, sec. 65 para
1). As to derivative works, there is no special rule as both the author
of the original work and the author of the derivative work hold
independent copyrights. Thus, each protection term is calculated
separately under the general rule. For anonymous and pseudonymous works,
the deciding date is the publication of the work (UrhG, sec. 66 para 1).
If, however, the author or his legal successor reveals her identity
before the expiration — that is within the 70-year period after
publication — or if the author’s identity is clear, the duration of the
copyright is calculated under the general rule set forth in sec. 64 and
65 (UrhG, sec. 66 para 2).

### Copyright assignment {#_copyright_assignment_2}

In principle, German copyright law does not distinguish between software
and other protected works when it comes to the fundamental mechanisms of
the transfer and assignment of rights. German copyright tradition is
built on the idea that both economic and moral interests in a work come
from the same root (so called “monism theory”). As moral interests are
seen as being linked directly with an author’s personality, it is not
possible for an author to completely assign all rights in a work or, to
put it in other words, to entirely transfer the ownership of the work.
This being said, it cannot come as a surprise that the concept of works
made for hire is foreign to German copyright law as well.

The legal mechanism used for giving other parties the rights to use and
exploit a work is the grant of a bundle of rights. To achieve results
similar to a complete copyright transfer, one would grant all exclusive
usage rights to the licensee. The original author would still be
entitled to her moral rights and could object to certain uses on their
basis.[^214]

However, art. 2 para 3 of the Software Directive caused the German
legislator to introduce a clause into the Copyright Act that
significantly eases the acquisition of developers' rights by their
employers. Sec. 69b, which is applicable only to software but not to
other work categories, implements this EU provision and provides that
“\[w\]here a computer program is created by an employee in the execution
of his duties or following the instructions given by his employer, the
employer exclusively shall be entitled to exercise all the economic
rights in the program, unless otherwise agreed.” Thus, it is presumed
that an employer obtains all economic rights in a software program
created by an employee as long as the creation of the program occurred
within the framework of her obligations as an employee. Two
observations: First, the employer does not become the author of the
software (as would be the case if it were a work made for hire system)
but only obtains the economic rights that is, the rights needed for the
commercial exploitation of the work. The moral rights, however, remain
unaffected. Second, the presumption can be overcome by individual
agreement.

### Special measures {#_special_measures_3}

In case of infringement, a mix of provisions governing the enforcement
of the copyright applies. Most general provisions of the Copyright Act
are applicable to software in the same way as to any other
copyright-protected work. Most importantly, sec. 97 para 1 accords to
the authors and holders of exclusive rights the right to demand from the
infringer to cease and desist from her infringing actions (provided that
there is the danger that she will repeat the infringement,
*Unterlassungsanspruch*) and to correct the infringement already caused
(*Beseitigungsanspruch*). Moreover, where the infringement was
intentional or the result of negligence, the holders of exclusive rights
may also ask for damages (sec. 97 para 2).[^215] According to sec. 97
para 2 sentence 4, authors may also demand a monetary indemnity for the
injury caused to them even if no pecuniary loss has occurred. Sec. 101
accords to the infringed right holders the right to require from the
infringer to be informed as to the origin and distribution channels of
the infringing copies, which includes in particular the name and address
of the manufacturer; the supplier and other prior owners of the copies
and of the commercial customers; the quantity of copies that have been
manufactured, dispatched, received or ordered; and the prices obtained.

In addition, UrhG, sec. 69f contains special provisions exclusively
governing software, in particular with regard to DRM protection, and
pursuant to UrhG, sec. 69a para 5, the general provisions about DRM
protection (UrhG, sec. 95a through 95d) do not apply to software.

According to UrhG, sec. 69f para 1, the holder of the rights in a
computer program is entitled to demand from anyone who owns or possesses
unlawfully manufactured or distributed copies, or copies intended for
unlawful distribution, to destroy these copies. This right does not
require intent or negligence on the part of the owner or proprietor, nor
is it required that the owner or proprietor herself infringed on the
copyright. It is sufficient that the copies are made or distributed in
an objectively unlawful way. In this sense, sec. 69f para 1 is
considerably further-reaching than the general rule set forth in sec. 98
para 1 of the Copyright Act, according to which the right to require the
destruction of unlawful copies can only be enforced against the actual
infringers.[^216] Apart from that, the right owner may also require ---
for appropriate compensation — that the owner or proprietor hand over
the infringing copies to her (sec. 69f para 1 sentence 2).

Sec. 69f para 1 applies *mutatis mutandis* to any means whose sole
intended purpose is to facilitate the unauthorized removal or
circumvention of any technical mechanism that protects the software from
copyright-infringing acts (sec. 69f para 2). In comparison with the
general provisions on technological measures that are designed to
restrict or prevent certain acts which are not authorized by the right
holder and on destruction claims, there are a number of important
differences. First, sec. 69f para 2 does not provide for a direct
prohibition of any act of circumventing technical measures. Second, sec.
69f para 2 applies only when the circumvention means are *solely*
designed for circumvention purposes, whereas sec. 98 para 1 sentence 2
of the Copyright Act provides for a destruction claim also in cases
where a means is *predominantly* used for the creation of infringing
copies. Third, sec. 69f para 2 (as para 1) does not require intent or
negligence. Finally, para 2, just as para 1, provides for a claim
against any owner or proprietor irrespective of whether she is the
infringer.

### The right to equitable remuneration and the so-called “Linux clause” {#_the_right_to_equitable_remuneration_and_the_so_called_8220_linux_clause_8221}

With a right to equitable remuneration of each author, in 2002 the
German legislator introduced a feature into copyright law that is rather
uncommon on the international level. According to UrhG, sec. 32 para 1
sentence 3, if the initially agreed compensation is not equitable, any
author has the right to require assent from the other contracting party
to amend the license agreement concluded between the two parties so that
the author is assured equitable remuneration. As this obviously has the
potential to conflict with the concept of FOSS, the German legislator,
pressed by the FOSS community, researchers, and practitioners,[^217]
inserted into UrhG, sec. 32 para 3 sentence 3 an exception to this rule
called the *Linux clause*. According to this provision, the author may
“grant a non-exclusive exploitation right without consideration to the
world at large,”[^218], which excludes the right to claim equitable
remuneration at any later point.

The situation is similar with regard to UrhG, sec. 32a, another
provision protecting authors' interests in getting a fair share of the
returns gained by using their works. This provision provides for an
author’s right to demand further compensation for the exploitation of
her work, in situations where the conditions of the grant of rights
cause the agreed consideration to be conspicuously disproportionate to
the returns and advantages from the use of the work. According to sec.
32a para 2, even third parties can be liable to pay to the author
additional compensation, if the author’s licensee has transferred the
exploitation rights granted to her, or granted further exploitation
rights, and the conspicuous disproportion results from advantages to
this third party. In this case, the original licensee ceases to be
liable under sec. 32a. In order to protect the functioning of the FOSS
concept that is built on not paying for the exploitation rights, the
German legislator decided to include in sec. 32a para 3 sentence 3 the
same exception as sec. 32 para 3 sentence 3 delineated above.[^219]

According to their wording, both sec. 32 para 3 sentence 3 and 32a para
3 sentence 3 only apply if the author herself puts her work under a
general non-exclusive license for everyone. Yet one might wonder whether
she can claim equitable remuneration or additional compensation if she
grants exclusive rights to a third party who later puts the work under a
FOSS license. There is no case law on this matter; but if the license
agreement between the author and the third party expressly provides for
the third party’s right to distribute the program as FOSS, the situation
is so similar to the one directly contemplated by said provisions of the
Copyright Act that in this case they should be applied by way of
analogy. However, the outcome should be different if the author’s
licensee uses both a FOSS and a commercial license. In such a case, the
author must get a fair share of the returns made by the commercial
distribution of her creation; the Linux clauses do not apply.

Another issue should also be briefly considered. It deals with whether
or not UrhG, sec. 32 and 32a have a bearing on cases where software was
created in an employer-employee relationship (which is, as discussed
above, governed by the presumption of UrhG, sec. 69b).[^220] There is no
authoritative answer to this question so far; however, based on older
case law regarding sec. 32a’s predecessor[^221] it seems likely that
sec. 32a also applies if an employer obtained exploitation rights under
sec. 69b.[^222] The consequence is that an employee who did not give her
consent to the distribution of his creation under a FOSS license would
not be hindered in raising a claim under sec. 32a UrhG. If, on the other
hand, the employee assented to a FOSS distribution, sec. 32a para 3
sentence 3 should apply by way of analogy. In contrast, sec. 32 is
probably not applicable to employed software authors.[^223]

Unprotected software and public domain software {#sec_unprotected}
-----------------------------------------------

As explained, German copyright doctrine does not allow the complete
waiver of one’s copyright, and consequently, public domain software
cannot be seen as software to which the author has forgone all her
copyrights. Hence, real public domain software — software without a
rights holder — is a phenomenon that can occur only after the expiration
of the protection term. However, the term “public domain software” is
widely used in Germany as it is in other countries. As this may not be
understood as the non-existence of any rights in the software, another
mechanism applies for giving effect to a right holder’s desire to enable
everyone to freely use the program: putting a program in the public
domain can be interpreted as granting to everyone a non-exclusive right
to use the software.[^224]

However, FOSS is not considered public domain software, as FOSS authors
do not give up their rights but rather use copyright to enforce their
interests.[^225]

Analysis of FOSS under German law {#sec_analysisgerman}
---------------------------------

### Copyrights {#_copyrights_2}

#### Qualification of FOSS {#_qualification_of_foss_3}

Even though the general public often assumes that a FOSS author forgoes
her rights, the generally accepted opinion among lawyers, including the
courts, is correctly that FOSS authors rather use the traditional
mechanisms of copyright to enforce their particular interests.[^226]
Thus, the analysis of FOSS under German copyright law can build on its
generally accepted structures.

The first issue that has to be dealt with is the question of authorship:
Who is the original rights-owner of FOSS software? And who is entitled
to enforce the rights emanating from authorship? The general principles
of authorship have been presented above, but how do they apply to
software that from the outset is often created by a group of developers
and then set free so that hundreds or thousands of people contribute to
the further development of the software?

Four terms representing different concepts come to mind: co- or joint
authorship, derivative works, compound works, and collective works.

### Rights of the original co-authors {#_rights_of_the_original_co_authors_2}

Sec. 8 para 1 of the Copyright Act sets out two factors of joint
authorship: (1) the work must have been jointly created by several
authors; and (2) their contributions cannot be separately exploited.

\(1) Joint creation:

Joint authorship requires that two or more authors willfully collaborate
in order to create a work. They must follow a common idea and have a
shared plan to create a unitary work. Joint authors agree on a common
task and reciprocally align the creative process with the collective
idea to create an integrated work.[^227] In contrast, the creator of a
derivative work does not collaborate with the author of the original
work.

It is not necessary, however, for the authors to work at the same time
or at the same place.[^228] Hence, collaborative software development
over networks can lead to the creation of a joint work, as would
developing a program while being in the same office. Nevertheless, in
most FOSS projects joint authorship is less common than the creation of
derivative works.

\(2) Unitary exploitation:

Joint authorship further requires that the contributions of the distinct
authors cannot be exploited separately. If a separate exploitation is
possible — as is the case, for instance, for software modules or
libraries — it is rather a case of compound works (UrhG, sec. 9).

According to para 2 of sec. 8 of the Copyright Act, “the right of
publication and of exploitation of the work shall belong jointly to the
joint authors.” Alterations to the work are permissible only if every
joint author consents. The consequence of this is that every contributor
to a jointly developed computer program has to agree with the
exploitation of the program, in particular with putting it under a FOSS
license.[^229]

The third sentence of para 2 of the provision is of great importance for
the enforcement of FOSS licenses. Pursuant to its terms, each joint
author alone is entitled to assert claims arising from infringements of
the joint copyright. Hence, it enables every contributor to enforce
compliance with the applicable FOSS license through cease and desist
claims under UrhG, sec. 97 para 1. However, it should be noted that a
single joint author may demand payment of damages only to all joint
authors. This means that while one single joint author is in principle
allowed to enforce payment claims, she must, when doing so, name every
other co-author of the work and demand payment to all co-authors
together. The purpose of this requirement is the protection of the other
co-authors not raising the payment claim. The treatment of information
claims is disputed, but it seems reasonable to allow each single author
to enforce this kind of claim alone without being obligated to refer to
each and every co-author.[^230]

### Authors of derivative works {#_authors_of_derivative_works_3}

Another way of creating new software is the alteration of pre-existing
programs, as contemplated by UrhG, sec. 3, 23, and 69c No. 2. If this is
the case, both the old and the new work are separately protected under
copyright law. However, the author of the derived work needs consent
from the author of the original work in order to be able to lawfully
exploit the new creation. It is not always easy to decide whether a work
was created as a joint work or just derived from another one. The main
aspect is the afore-mentioned factor of having a common, shared plan: if
one existed and the contributions were not separately exploitable, it is
a case of joint authorship; otherwise, it is a derivative work or a case
of compound works.

In derivative work situations, both the author of the original work and
the author of the derived work may enforce their own rights without
having to involve the other.

### Compound works {#_compound_works}

Independent works — that is, works that were created and can be
exploited independently from each other — that are combined by several
authors for exploitation in common are called compound works and are
governed by UrhG, sec. 9. Sec. 9 not only requires the act of combining
the works, but the combination must be made for *joint exploitation*. In
other words, the respective authors must enter — expressly or
impliedly — into an agreement that the works are supposed to be
exploited in common.[^231] Hence, compound works may be created only if
each author consents in advance to the combination of the works. The
legal consequence is that each author of the several works combined may
require from the others their consent to the publication, exploitation,
or alteration of the compound works, provided that such consent may be
reasonably demanded of them. Contrary to cases of joint authorship, the
authorship on every separate work remains unaffected by the combination.
Thus, the rights in each separate work can be enforced separately.

### Collective works {#_collective_works}

In addition, German copyright law also protects collective works. These
are collections of works, data, or other independent elements, provided
that the collection itself is a personal intellectual creation (UrhG,
sec. 4 para 1) — in other words, work as defined by UrhG, sec. 2 para 2.

The difference between collective works and works of joint authorship is
that in the latter case, one single work is created whose parts cannot
be exploited separately, whereas an exploitation of the parts of a
collective work is perfectly possible. If a work is co-authored, only
one work exists; if a collection is created, one can distinguish between
the collection as one work, and its parts as different works.

The decisive aspect for the distinction between collections and compound
works is the following: For bringing compounds of works into existence,
it is necessary that the authors of the individual works themselves
determine what works should be combined and decide that exactly these
works should be exploited in common. In the case of a collection, by
contrast, the authors of the several parts grant exploitation rights to
a third party and do not designate which works will eventually be used
for the collection.[^232]

Due to the fact that the copyright in the collective work is independent
from that in the parts of the collection (provided they are works), the
exploitation of the collective work requires the consent of both the
creator of the collective work and the authors of its parts.[^233] Each
author, including the author of the collection, may enforce her rights
separately.

### The assignment of copyrights {#_the_assignment_of_copyrights_2}

Copyright assignments or contribution agreements that are designed to
transfer the complete copyright to the assignee are problematic under
German law. Under German copyright law, the complete transfer of
copyright is not possible, so such assignments risk being void.
Therefore, when drafting such agreements, it is recommended to take into
consideration the legal situation in Germany and other “droit
d’auteur”-countries. The solution that comes closest to a complete
transfer is the grant of all exclusive usage rights to the licensee,
leaving the author her moral rights that enable her to object to certain
uses.

FOSS developers relatively often enter into so-called fiduciary license
agreements or contribution agreements, according to which the grantee
receives unlimited exclusive rights in the developer’s work. These kinds
of agreements are used for avoiding copyright fragmentation; they serve
to concentrate the rights, with one person or entity having the means to
take care of licensing and copyright enforcement. In order to protect
the FOSS principle, fiduciary license agreements often contain a clause
linking the allegiance of the fiduciary to FOSS principles with the
validity of the grant itself.[^234] If, in contrast, the grantee has the
right to license the work against license fees, the grantor is entitled
to equitable remuneration (see UrhG, sec. 32), and the agreement should
provide for a compensation clause.[^235]

### Moral rights {#_moral_rights_2}

Even though moral rights play a rather minor role in the software
context, they may have some ramifications on the use of FOSS. Most
importantly, from a practical perspective, authors are entitled to
decide whether the work is to bear an author’s designation and what
designation is to be used (UrhG, sec. 13).

In addition, FOSS developers have a particular interest in maintaining a
flawless reputation. Thus, they have a strong interest in fighting
distortions of their works that may be detrimental to their standing,
which argues for the application of UrhG, sec. 14, at least in some
cases. However, it should be considered that software is by its nature
normally subject to further developments, and that in addition many FOSS
licenses require licensees to clearly indicate each modification made to
the software.[^236] Nevertheless, this does not totally exclude the
possibility that authors rely in certain cases on UrhG, sec. 14.

But what if a license — such as the GNU General Public
License[^237] — stipulates that the licensor allows any kind of
alteration to the software? The answer to this question lies in the
general tendency of German copyright law to always protect a core of
authors' moral interests. Thus a complete renouncement for the future,
especially in so-called standard business terms,[^238] is not possible.
Consequently, in some more severe cases, developers will be able to
enforce their moral rights against modifications of their software even
if the applicable FOSS license seems to allow any kind of alterations,
the infringing one included.

### Enforcing FOSS licenses {#_enforcing_foss_licenses_3}

#### Contractual relationships {#_contractual_relationships}

Under German law, FOSS licenses are commonly seen as license agreements
between the licensor and the licensee, and therefore as contracts.[^239]
When receiving FOSS, however, in most cases the FOSS license agreement
is not the only contractual relationship the receiving party enters
into: normally, the distributor of the software will not be identical
with the holder of the exclusive rights; hence, there will also be an
agreement between the recipient of the software and the distributor
handing her the software. In the following, we will focus on this case
where right holders and distributors are not identical. It is crucial
then to distinguish between these two basic relationships, as otherwise
it is impossible to come to correct assessments of issues like liability
and warranty. All issues relating to copyrights in the FOSS have to be
determined under the FOSS license agreement. This covers first of all
the question of what exploitation rights the user of the FOSS has, what
conditions she must meet, and what the consequences of a breach of the
license requirements are. Problems like the legal responsibility for the
software itself have to be solved under the agreement between the
supplier and the recipient of the software. The most important issue in
this context is the legal responsibility for defects in the software.
However, a lack of title can be a problem of the relationship between
the distributor and the user, as well.

Finally, it should be noted that although we are dealing here with a
triangle of relationships, so far only two sides of this triangle have
been mentioned. The missing part is the relationship between the holder
of the exclusive rights and the distributor. All problems concerning
rights, warranties, and liability are governed by their specific
agreements.

#### Validity of the contract {#_validity_of_the_contract_2}

The mechanisms of the conclusion and validity of the contract between
the supplier and the recipient of the software do not pose any specific
problems. Therefore, the focus of the following analysis will be on the
relationship between the holder of the exclusive FOSS rights and its
licensee.

\(1) Contract as offer and acceptance

Any contract is entered into by an offer from one party and the
corresponding acceptance by the other. The German understanding is that
the delivery of the license text of a FOSS license constitutes a valid
offer.[^240] Any use of the software by the licensee requiring the grant
of a right to her that exceeds the limits of the statutory permissions
under UrhG, sec. 69d, can be construed as an implied acceptance.[^241]
Normally, however, the offeror needs to be notified of the acceptance in
order for a contract to come into existence; but according to sec. 151
sentence 1 of the German Civil Code, [^242] a notification of the
offeror is not required if such notification is not to be expected
according to customary practice, or if the offeror has waived it. In
case of the use of a FOSS license by the holder of the exclusive rights
in a computer program, it is fair to say that both alternatives may
apply: the right holder waives the notification requirement by relying
on the FOSS license, and it is customary practice in these kinds of
cases not to notify the right holder of the acceptance.[^243]

\(2) The law on standard business terms

The particularities of German private law pose another problem as to the
question of whether licensor and licensee validly agreed on the terms of
a FOSS license that was included in the software delivery: FOSS licenses
are not written for individual contracts but formulated for an
indefinite number of contracts and presented by the licensor to the
potential licensee with no chance for the latter to negotiate their
terms. Thus, they are generally regarded as standard business
terms,[^244] which are governed by the restrictions of BGB, sec. 305
through 310. These provisions were introduced into the Civil Code with
the purpose of protecting parties to whom standard business terms are
presented. The first problem that arises from this fact is how a FOSS
license in its quality as standard business terms becomes a part of a
contract between both parties. How does the licensee take cognizance of
the license (or at least of the fact that the software at hand is under
a FOSS license)? And is it a problem that the license text is in
English, a foreign language for most people living in Germany?

Pursuant to BGB, sec. 305 para 2, standard business terms “only become a
part of a contract if the user, when entering into the contract, (1)
refers the other party to the contract to them explicitly or, where
explicit reference, due to the way in which the contract is entered
into, is possible only with disproportionate difficulty, by posting a
clearly visible notice at the place where the contract is entered into,
and (2) gives the other party to the contract, in an acceptable manner,
which also takes into reasonable account any physical handicap of the
other party to the contract that is discernible to the user, the
opportunity to take notice of their contents, and if the other party to
the contract agrees to their applying.”[^245]

In most cases of FOSS distribution, these requirements will not be
fulfilled.[^246] However, from a practical perspective, this is not a
real problem. First, irrespective of the license being incorporated into
a contractual relationship between the FOSS licensor and a licensee, the
limitation of warranties and liability normally contained in FOSS
licenses are in any case void.[^247] Moreover, the mere use of a
computer program is allowed pursuant to UrhG, sec. 69d, without the
necessity for the parties to enter into a license agreement.[^248]
Hence, in most cases of using a FOSS program, there is no need for a
license agreement at all. Only if someone desires to make
further-reaching use of the software than allowed by UrhG, sec. 69d
would one need to obtain a license. In such a case, it would be
self-contradictory to assert on the one hand rights that can only be
granted through a license agreement, and to claim on the other hand that
this license is void (*venire contra factum proprium*).

Therefore, one can presume that someone who distributes, modifies, or
reproduces FOSS has taken cognizance of the applicable license and has
accepted its terms.[^249]

The same reasoning applies *mutatis mutandis* to the issue of the
license language: sserting on the one hand that the license is void
because of its language but relying at the same time on the rights
granted thereunder would be self-contradictory. In addition, the FOSS
license forms the entire contractual relationship between licensor and
licensee, including the language of the initial offer to enter into an
agreement. In such a case — the language of the negotiations between the
parties being not German — the incorporation of non-German standard
business terms is possible and valid.[^250]

\(3) Waiver of warranty and liability

As briefly mentioned before, the common warranty and liability waivers
contained in FOSS licenses go far beyond what is permitted in standard
business terms, whether in agreements with consumers or in pure business
matters.[^251] Consequently they are considered void.

\(4) Antitrust law

The compliance of FOSS copyleft licenses with competition law is another
issue worth mentioning. One could argue that such licenses are in
conflict with the prohibition of price fixing as they force licensees to
give away modified works for free - that is at a fixed price. However,
the prevailing view in Germany is — with differing reasons — that the
obligation to distribute derivative works for free cannot be regarded as
price-fixing.[^252]

Moreover, users of FOSS could not gain very much from claiming that the
relevant license is void. They need a license in order to be able to
make use of the software, at least if the use exceeds the boundaries of
UrhG, sec. 69d. If a court declares the FOSS license void or not
applicable, they would still not obtain a license and would thus not be
entitled to the use of the desired software.[^253] They can either
receive the required rights through the FOSS license, or they will have
no rights at all.

#### Violation of license conditions {#_violation_of_license_conditions}

Whether the violation of a license agreement is merely a breach of
contract or also constitutes a copyright infringement, is a standard
problem known from many intellectual property cases. Many FOSS licenses
address this issue by including an express provision on the effects of
violating the license terms. Sec. 4 of the GPLv2, for instance, states
clearly that any failure to comply with the conditions of the GPLv2 will
automatically terminate the license. German courts had no problem with
aligning this with the basic principles of German private and copyright
law. From the very first case, the courts followed the prevailing
academic opinion and interpreted this as a condition subsequent,
pursuant to BGB, sec. 158 para 2.[^254] Consequently, it is generally
accepted that violations of FOSS licenses which include express
conditions on the grant of rights constitute copyright infringements and
not merely a breach of contract. It should be noted that an infringer
beginning to comply with the FOSS license conditions cannot “heal” the
past infringement; the “old” license is not reinstated in such a case,
but she enters into a new license agreement with the FOSS licensor.

### Waiver and liability {#_waiver_and_liability_3}

As mentioned above, the complete waiver of any warranty and liability
commonly used in FOSS licenses conflicts with general principles of
German private law and is void. But what is the impact of the
ineffectiveness of these provisions? The starting point for finding an
answer to this question is evident: the statutory law on warranties and
liability applies. But what exactly does this mean?

In order to carry out a correct analysis of this problem, one has to
clearly distinguish between the contractual relationships among the
parties involved.

#### Relationship distributor — user {#_relationship_distributor_8201_8212_8201_user}

As far as the relationship between distributor and user is concerned,
the ineffectiveness of the waivers has no importance, as they would
apply only to the relationship between the holder of the exclusive
rights in the software and her licensee. What is the distributor’s
liability then? The answer to this question depends on several factors.
In cases where the distributor and the user do not enter into a specific
agreement on warranties and liability, the most important question is
whether the distributor gives away the software completely for free or
whether payments for handing out the software are involved (for
instance, “for the physical act of transferring a copy,”[^255] or if the
software is offered in a package with support services[^256]). In the
first case, the provisions of the law on donations apply, thereby
considerably limiting the distributor’s liability. According to BGB,
sec. 524 para 1, the sole liability a donor bears is that she has to pay
damages to her contractual partner if she fraudulently concealed a
defect of quality.[^257] Thus, the distributor must advise her customers
of bugs she knows about. Defects of title are dealt with in BGB, sec.
523 para 1, in exactly the same way. A distributor would be liable, for
example, for damages caused by her passing the software off as open
source software against her better knowledge.

The liability for damaging events that do not affect the equivalence of
the contractual primary obligations but impair the value of the donnee’s
property in general (that is, not the donated software itself) is
governed by BGB, sec. 521, according to which the donor’s liability is
restricted to acts of intent and gross negligence.

If, on the other hand, the distributor gives away the software while she
receives payments from her customers, the privileges for donors that
German private law provides for do not necessarily apply. It is
impossible to find a general rule precisely stipulating when, in cases
of contracts containing a mix of paid and unpaid duties, the whole
contract must be considered non-gratuitous. The general tendency appears
to rather assume that this kind of agreement is for remuneration. In
this case, much stricter rules on liabilities and warranties — the law
of the sale of goods — apply. Thus, according to BGB, sec. 439, the
recipient of the software may demand supplementary performance from the
distributor if the software received is defective as to its quality. If
she fails to remedy the defect within a reasonable time, the recipient
may terminate the contract, reduce the compensation, claim damages, or
demand reimbursement for her wasted expenditures.[^258] This does not
differ at all from the rights a recipient has against a distributor of
proprietary software.

If, on the other hand, the distributor and the user have come to a valid
agreement concerning the former’s warranties and liability, the terms of
this agreement replace the above provisions.[^259]

#### Relationship right holder — user {#_relationship_right_holder_8201_8212_8201_user}

As to the relationship between the holder of the exclusive rights and
the licensee, the following mechanism applies: There is no contractual
responsibility for any defects of quality of the software itself. The
right holder does not deliver (in the situation discussed herein) the
software itself but only grants the rights on this software.[^260] Thus,
her responsibility only covers the lack of title. As the grant of rights
is gratuitous, it is governed by the principles of the law of donations.
Hence, the responsibility of the rights owner is, according to BGB, sec.
523, limited to cases where she fraudulently conceals the existence of
third-party rights.[^261]

However, it should be noted that in a case where the licensor is
situated in a country other than Germany, the laws of that country will
most probably apply (see art. 4 para 2 of the so-called Rome I
regulation[^262]).

#### Product liability {#_product_liability}

Apart from the contractual liability explained above, software
developers and distributors can also be subject to the principles of
product liability as set forth in the German Product Liability
Act[^263]. This act provides for direct damages claims against the
producer of a product if the product is defective, and the defect causes
the death or bodily injury of someone, or damages a thing other than the
defective product itself that is used for private purposes (sec. 1 para
1). Claims for financial loss are not covered by the German Product
Liability Act. Defects are defined in terms of the lack of safety the
product provides (sec. 3), which deviates significantly from general
private law.

Whether or not product liability applies depends on whether the
developer or distributor are “producers”, as defined by sec. 4 of the
Product Liability Act. According to this provision, a producer is the
person or entity who has made the product, who uses a distinctive sign
giving the impression that she is the maker of the product, or who
imports the product into the European Economic Area in order to
distribute it for commercial purposes. Hence, both developers and
distributors of FOSS can in principle be regarded as producers in terms
of the Product Liability Act. However, pursuant to sec. 1 para 2 no. 3,
the liability under this act is excluded if the respective product was
neither made for sale or any other form of commercial distribution, nor
made or distributed as part of the professional activities of the
producer.

Claims under the Product Liability Act may not be waived or limited in
advance; any agreements to the contrary effect are void.

#### Torts {#_torts}

Finally, producers and distributors of FOSS may also be liable under the
general law of torts (BGB, sec. 823 ff.). Liability under sec. 823 para
1 of the Civil Code — the fundamental torts provision — requires that
the tortfeasor at least acted negligently. In this context, it is
important that according to the Federal Court of Justice, the liability
limitations of the law on donations under BGB, sec. 521 (liability only
for intent and gross negligence) also apply to the law of torts, as long
as a parallel donor-donee relationship existed between both sides.[^264]

Moreover, BGB, sec. 823 para 1 also requires that a so-called absolute
right was infringed. Such rights include life, body, health, freedom,
and property. Most likely, tort claims from the delivery of defective
FOSS will arise because of damages to property and bodily
injuries.[^265]

### The copyleft principle {#_the_copyleft_principle_2}

#### Principle {#_principle_3}

A common feature of many FOSS licenses is the “copyleft” principle. This
term means that any licensee is obligated to put derivate works that she
creates based on the licensor’s work under the same license obligations
as the original work if she distributes the derivative work.

#### Validity {#_validity_3}

As clear and simple as this principle appears, it is very difficult in
its practical application. The main issue is how to define what
constitutes a derivative work or — in copyright terms — what UrhG, sec.
69c no. 2 means by “adaptation, arrangement and any other alteration of
a computer program.” The answer to this question is particularly
important for cases where the code of the original work is not itself
modified, but where the original program is combined with other programs
or program components. There is no case law on this problem,[^266] and
literature dealing with this issue is scarce. One proposal brought
forward in the literature with regard to the implementation of the
Software Directive is to apply the rather formal criteria of whether or
not the new software uses an interface to communicate with the original
one.[^267]

Even though the question of what constitutes an adaptation or alteration
of a computer program thus remains largely open, it is fair to say that
the copyleft principle as such is valid under German law; right holders
are allowed to make their grants subject to the compliance with certain
requirements.

In the same context, a further issue should be mentioned. Existing
copyleft licenses provide for various wordings and can consequently be
different in their scope. This can, at least in theory, be a legal issue
if a copyleft obligation is put on the recipient of the software even
for cases where copyright law does not require her to obtain a license
for moving forward with her own programming. For most copyleft licenses,
this is not a real issue, however.[^268] On the other hand, sec. 2 of
the GPLv2 could be interpreted in such a way that its definition of the
term “derivative work” goes beyond what is covered by UrhG, sec. 69c no.
2 (the exclusive right to alter the software), when it states that even
independent sections that are distributed as part of a whole have to be
licensed under the GPLv2 if one of them is GPLv2 software. Nevertheless,
this does not necessarily mean that this GPL provision goes any further
than what German copyright law requires. The reason is that not only the
alteration of a work but also the distribution of several works as
compound works under UrhG, sec. 9 requires each right holder’s
consent.[^269] However, the impact of sec. 2 of the GPLv2 on cases where
one could neither argue that the program at hand was altered nor that a
compound work was created (if this is possible at all) depends on the
circumstances of the concrete situation.

### Claims against infringing acts. Damages {#_claims_against_infringing_acts_damages}

Practical experience has shown that the GPLv2 can be enforced in Germany
without major difficulties.[^270]

Under German law, copyright infringements can trigger a number of
statutory claims, the most important one being the right to compel the
infringer to refrain from further infringing acts. Such a claim requires
that there is the danger that the infringer commits further infringing
acts, which normally is presumed on the basis of the
pre-infringement.[^271] In contrast, it is not required that the
infringer acts intentionally or at least negligently.

Moreover, the right holder may also require the infringer to abolish
anything interfering with the right holder’s rights.

An infringed party may also bring forward a claim for destruction or
surrender of unlawfully manufactured or distributed copies or of all
copies intended for unlawful distribution (UrhG, sec. 69f para 1).[^272]

Furthermore, UrhG, sec. 101 stipulates that any injured party may
require from any person who infringes on her copyright in the course of
business to give information as to the origin and distribution channels
of such copies.

Finally, UrhG, sec. 97 para 1 sentence 1, 3rd case provides for claims
for damages. In contrast to cease and desist claims, damages claims
require fault on the part of the infringer. Hence, the infringer must
have caused the infringement intentionally or at least negligently. It
is sufficient if the infringer could have known and should have known
that she is infringing on someone else’s copyright.[^273] German courts
tend to be rather strict (for instance, requiring that a software
distributor control the license chain) and will in most cases assume
that an infringer acted at least negligently.

Three ways of determining the amount of damages are established: the
actual damages including lost profits; payment of the equivalent of an
appropriate license fee; or an account of profits. The infringed right
holder has a choice among these three methods.

In cases of dual licensing, it is a reasonable option to choose the
second method of damage calculation because in such cases the infringed
party is able to prove how much she would normally charge licensees for
exploitation rights in the software. In other cases, it is more
advisable for FOSS owners to claim an account of profits. However, this
option is also potentially problematic if the infringed party holds only
rights to a derived work.[^274]

An interesting feature of the law on damages can be found in UrhG, sec.
97 para 2. Under this provision, right owners can ask for
indemnification for immaterial damages that is, the infringement of
moral rights. One example might be the distribution of a computer
program without naming the author. Another possibility would be that
someone who is not the true author poses as such. However,
indemnifications for the violation of moral rights are in practice
rather rare and come into consideration mostly in very serious cases.

Legal procedures {#sec_legalprocedures}
----------------

### Standing to sue {#_standing_to_sue}

The first issue that must be dealt with regarding procedural law is the
question of who is entitled to sue. In most FOSS cases there is not only
one right owner in the infringed program, because most software in
general, and FOSS in particular, is the product of collaboration between
many developers and later further development by others. As described
above, rights in FOSS can be owned by joint authors, by original
authors, by authors of derivative works, and by authors of compound
works. Who in these cases is in a position to enforce the copyrights in
the computer program?

#### Joint authors {#_joint_authors}

According to UrhG, sec. 8 para 2 sentence 3, each joint author of a work
may enforce the exclusive rights in this work. However, she may demand
payment only on behalf of all joint authors. In other words, she may go
to court and ask for a decision that compels the infringer to refrain
from the infringing acts, but she must ask for the payment of damages
for the benefit of every joint author. Thus, when filing her action, she
has to name every co-author of the work whose rights were infringed
upon.[^275] The size and diversity of developer communities involved in
the development of computer programs can make this an extremely
difficult task. However, the prerequisite of following a common idea
when creating a program in order to justify the classification as joint
authors limits quite significantly the number of developers who have to
be considered; as a consequence, it is in most cases not impossible to
prepare an exhaustive list of all joint authors.

#### Compound works {#_compound_works_2}

For compound works, the Copyright Act does not contain a provision
similar to sec. 8 para 2 sentence 3. The most reasonable rule one could
apply should be to let each author enforce the rights in her own
creation.

#### Derivative works {#_derivative_works}

As described above, the situation is different for derivative works.
Both the creator of the original work and the author of the derived work
hold by law a full right in their respective work. Both are therefore
entitled to institute proceedings against any infringer on their rights.
However, the derivative work’s author may not create or exploit any
derivative works without the original author’s consent.

This being said, German doctrine applies UrhG, sec. 8 para 2 sentence 3
by analogy to certain situations involving derivative works. The creator
of the derivative work is hence permitted to ask for injunctive relief
against any acts infringing on the work, even if the part concerned was
not created by her but the original author. On the other hand, she may
ask for damages only insofar as the part of the work she created herself
is concerned.[^276] This can lead to severe, almost insurmountable
problems regarding the calculation of the damages.

### Courses of action {#_courses_of_action}

If right holders wish to receive injunctive relief from a court, German
law requires them to first institute out-of-court-proceedings: Right
holders must first contact the infringers directly, demand that they
cease and desist from the infringing acts, and enter into a cease and
desist agreement with a sufficient contractual penalty for every case of
violating the agreement. Sec. 97a of the Copyright Act only uses the
verb “should”, thereby leaving it up to the infringed person to decide
whether she wants to deal with the matter out of court first. However,
if the right holder starts direct court action, she risks having to bear
all the costs of the court proceedings, including those of the
infringer, if the infringer immediately acknowledges in court the claims
brought forward against her.[^277] This explains why, in practice,
injured parties will almost always first send out a cease and desist
letter. Moreover, it is important to know that the infringer is
obligated to reimburse the infringed party for all necessary costs she
incurred for the enforcement of her rights, including the statutory
legal fees incurred for an attorney sending a formal cease and desist
letter (UrhG, sec. 97a para 3 sentence 1).

As mentioned above, injunctive relief can only be sought if there is a
danger that the infringer will repeat the infringing acts in the future.
German courts interpret the previous commission of certain infringing
acts as the basis for a presumption in favor of the existence of such
danger. This presumption can only be overcome out of court by entering
into the afore-mentioned cease and desist agreement that includes the
enforceable promise to pay a contractual penalty for any future
infringing acts of the same nature. Thus, if the infringer issues such a
declaration, any filing for injunctive relief in the same matter will
have no success. If, however, the infringer refuses to sign a sufficient
declaration to cease and desist, the infringed party may seek injunctive
relief.

The right holder has two options for such court actions: filing for a
preliminary injunction or instituting the main proceedings. In IP
matters, it is common to ask for a preliminary injunction, as this is a
fast and relatively cheap way to get help from a court.[^278] However,
preliminary injunctions require that the matter be urgent. Even though
there is no strict rule as to when a matter is considered urgent, most
courts usually refuse to issue a preliminary injunction if the infringed
party has waited for more than one, at most two months after learning
about the infringement before going to court. A preliminary injunction,
if granted without prior hearing, [^279] is normally issued within a few
days after the request was submitted to the court.[^280] The main
proceedings, in contrast, can take from a few months up to considerably
more than a year, and that does not even take into account the first
right of appeal. After the issuance of a preliminary injunction, the
defendant often signs a formal declaration that the matter shall be
fully resolved with this injunction with the effect that no further
court action against her in this matter would be admissible.[^281]

As to the costs involved in litigation, it is important to know that
under German law, the losing party is obligated to reimburse the
prevailing one for its reasonable expenses according to the statutory
scales of attorney’s and court fees.[^282] Moreover, when filing a
complaint with a court, the plaintiff has to pay the court fees in
advance; for preliminary injunctions this is not required, however. The
expenses that are subject of reimbursement claims are determined
according to a statutory scale of attorney’s and court fees and depend
on the value in dispute. In FOSS cases the courts have so far assumed
values in dispute between EUR 100,000 and EUR 250,000. On this basis,
the financial risk a party bears for the case of loss in one instance
ranges from roughly EUR 9,000 to EUR 12,000 if no oral hearing is
involved (as often in preliminary injunction cases), and from EUR 12,000
to EUR 21,000 if an oral hearing takes place.

FOSS cases in Germany {#sec_fosscasesgerman}
---------------------

As FOSS is a relatively recent phenomenon, case law is still limited
internationally. In some landmark decisions, however, German courts left
no room for any doubts that FOSS licenses are enforceable. As a
consequence, most cases where FOSS right holders start proceedings
against infringers are resolved before even entering the court
stage.[^283]

### Welte v. Sitecom {#_welte_v_sitecom}

In 2004 the first case dealing with the violation of a FOSS license was
brought before a German court;[^284] the District Court of Munich I
(Landgericht München I) was asked by the right owner of an infringed
software program to grant a preliminary injunction to safeguard his
interests. The factual core of the matter was that the producer and
distributor of a W-LAN router distributed this router and made available
its firmware containing certain Linux kernel programs, which are
licensed under the GPLv2, without accompanying it with the GPLv2 text
and the complete corresponding source code or a written offer to provide
the source code on request as required by sec. 1 and 3 of the GPLv2.

The court had to address a couple of important issues: What is the
general quality of the GPLv2? Was the GPLv2 validly entered into between
the parties? Was it conflicting with the law on standard business terms
and, if yes, with what consequences? What are the consequences of a
GPLv2 violation: Is it a mere breach of contract, or does it constitute
a copyright infringement?

The first important statement the court made was that the use of the
GPLv2 did not mean that the right holders had waived any of their
copyrights: instead, they had used the means of copyright in order to
ensure that their work was used, distributed, and further developed
according to their ideas and plans.[^285]

The court also held that the GPLv2 constituted standard business terms
as governed by BGB, sec. 305 ff. The court found that they had become
part of the agreement between the plaintiff as the right holder and the
defendant. The court dedicated the most extensive analysis to the
discussion of sec. 4 of the GPLv2, which stipulates that any violation
of the license’s conditions terminates the grant of rights set out in
the agreement. The court held that this provision did not place the
licensee at an unreasonable disadvantage and was therefore not in
conflict with BGB, sec. 307.[^286] Sec. 4 of the GPLv2 constituted a
valid condition subsequent, pursuant to BGB, sec. 158 para 2.
Consequently, any breach of the license conditions led to the loss of
the rights a licensee had received, thereby causing any license
violation to be at the same time also an infringement of the licensor’s
copyrights.[^287] Finally, even if one assumed that sec. 4 GPLv2 went
beyond the boundaries of what BGB, sec. 307 allowed, the defendant would
have infringed on the plaintiff’s exclusive rights: In this case, no
license at all would have been granted to the former with the
consequence that also in this case they would have infringed on the
latter’s copyrights.[^288]

The preliminary injunction was granted and accepted by the defendant.

### Welte v. D-Link {#_welte_v_d_link}

The fundamental holdings of the *Sitecom* case were reaffirmed in 2006
by the District Court of Frankfurt/Main (Landgericht Frankfurt/Main),
which was asked by the plaintiff, this time in main proceedings, to
order the defendant to reimburse the plaintiff for the enforcement costs
incurred and to provide him with information about the distribution of
the infringing products.[^289] The facts the court had to decide about
were the following: A subsidiary of a Taiwanese consumer electronics
producer distributed a network media storage device whose firmware
contained the Linux kernel. However, the device was distributed without
GPLv2 license text or warranty waiver and without releasing the complete
corresponding source code. The plaintiff held the exclusive rights in
three of the Linux kernel programs and had sent the defendant a warning
letter demanding a sufficient cease and desist declaration. The
defendant had done accordingly, but refused to reimburse the plaintiff
for the expenses he had incurred for the enforcement of his rights (test
purchase, software engineering costs, attorney’s fees) and to disclose
information concerning the distribution channels of the infringing
products. In order to assess the plaintiff’s claims, the court had to
enter into an in-depth analysis of GPL-related issues similar to those
discussed in the *Sitecom* case.

In this case, the court emphasized once again that the use of the GPLv2
could not be interpreted as a waiver of any rights the holder of the
exclusive rights was awarded by law. It confirmed the classification of
the GPLv2 as standard business terms and held that sec. 4 of the license
provided for a condition subsequent, making every license violation a
copyright infringement.[^290] Besides the issue of
exhaustion[^291] — the court justly found that the plaintiff’s rights
were not exhausted, as the copies had not been lawfully put on the
market[^292] — it also raised the question whether the GPLv2 conflicted
with antitrust law, in particular with the prohibition of price fixing
and of fixing the conditions of the contracts the co-contractor enters
into with her customers. The court argued that the question did not need
to be answered, as either answer would have no effect on the assessment
of the legal situation regarding the defendant’s acts. The defendant
would in any event have needed to be granted a license; a finding of a
violation of antitrust law, however, would not have this effect, as it
would only void the GPLv2 itself, without providing any exploitation
rights in the programs used.[^293]

### Welte v. Skype {#_welte_v_skype}

Another GPLv2 case clarified the question of whether it was sufficient
to simply present a link to a website in order to provide the license
text and the source code if the software was distributed offline and not
online.[^294] The facts were the following: The defendant’s (Skype
Technologies SA) website had served as a platform for offering not only
voice over IP (VOIP) software but also VOIP hardware of different kinds.
Several producers and distributors used it as a marketing means. One of
the devices, a VOIP phone by SMC Networks, contained firmware with the
Linux kernel, but was delivered without the license text of the GPLv2
and without the source code or an offer to provide the source code on
request. The plaintiff first sent a cease and desist letter to SMC
Networks, whereupon the latter began to put a leaflet in the phone
packages that informed customers about the possibility to access both
the terms of the GPL or GNU Lesser General Public License (LGPL) and the
source code on their website. They did not sign a cease and desist
declaration. The plaintiff sent another warning letter to the owner of
the website where the phones were offered (Skype Technologies SA). Skype
itself also did not sign a sufficient declaration to refrain from
assisting in the distribution of the phone as long as the distribution
was not in compliance with the GPLv2. The plaintiff filed for a
preliminary injunction with the District Court of Munich I (Landgericht
München I).

The court confirmed that both SMC Networks and Skype had originally
infringed on the plaintiff’s copyright, Skype’s liability being based on
the concept of contributory liability. However, the analysis did not
stop there. The question the court faced now was whether SMC Networks
had entered into a valid license agreement under the GPLv2 with the
plaintiff by continuing the distribution of the VOIP phone with the
aforementioned leaflet added to the packages they sent to their
customers.[^295] In other words: Was it compliant with sec. 1 and 3 of
the GPLv2 to simply indicate a website where people could find both the
license text and the source code? The court’s answer was in the
negative. It based its conclusion on the wording of both license
provisions, which require giving any recipient of the program a copy of
the license text “along with the Program” and “accompany” the program
with its corresponding source code or a written offer for its delivery.
The court held that this clearly showed that in cases of a program’s
offline distribution, GPL compliance could only be achieved if copies of
the license text and the source code (or a written offer) were delivered
to the recipients in the distributed packages themselves.

It should be noted that the defendant appealed the decision mainly for
alleged violation of antitrust law.[^296] However, the defendant
withdrew the appeal after the Munich Court of Appeals (Oberlandesgericht
München) expressed in the hearing its clear intention to uphold the
District Court’s decision, arguing that even in the unlikely case that
the GPLv2 would violate antitrust provisions, such a violation would not
result in releasing a licensee of GPLv2 software from observing the
conditions of the GPLv2.

### FreeAdhocUDF (WISO Mein Büro 2009) {#_freeadhocudf_wiso_mein_büro_2009}

A recent judgment rendered by the District Court of Bochum (Landgericht
Bochum) dealt among other issues with whether the violation of the
conditions of a FOSS license — in this case, the GNU Lesser General
Public License, version 3 — could trigger claims for damages.[^297] The
question arose in the context of an action for disclosure of information
on sales figures regarding the software at issue that had been filed in
order to prepare an action for damages.

The court didn’t show any doubts that LGPLv3 violations could give rise
to claims for damages. Otherwise, the court argued, authors of free
software would practically not be protected against infringements of
their rights. The court found that the damages could be assessed by way
of a license analogy. However, as the damages issue arose only as part
of its analysis of the merits of the information claim, the court did
not discuss how a license analogy could be calculated for software under
a FOSS license. Also, the court did not consider other ways of
determining the damages to be paid (actual damages and skimming of
profits), as the plaintiff had exclusively relied on the license
analogy.

The parties settled the matter in 2012, agreeing on a payment of EUR
15,000 as compensation for the damages suffered.

### AVM v. Cybits {#_avm_v_cybits}

In 2011 the District Court of Berlin (Landgericht Berlin) published a
decision that touched upon more complex questions regarding software
copyright and open source licensing.[^298] The decision was the end
point of a case that had gone through two instances in preliminary
proceedings before reaching the district court in the main proceedings.
For the sake of clarity, the focus here shall be on the final decision
of the District Court.

The plaintiff in the matter was AVM Computersysteme Vertriebs GmbH
(AVM), the biggest German producer and distributor of DSL routers. AVM’s
routers, called “Fritz!Box” used a firmware built around the Linux
kernel. The defendant was Cybits AG (Cybits), a company that distributed
software called “SurfSitter” which consumers could use for modifying the
kernel parts of the Fritz!Box firmware in order to achieve a certain
degree of control over their children’s surfing behavior. AVM’s goal
when instituting the court proceedings was to enjoin Cybits from the
distribution of SurfSitter.[^299] Apparently, no firmware programs
developed by AVM itself were changed by SurfSitter.

The court denied AVM’s copyright claims and ruled that the defendant was
allowed to distribute software consumers may use for changing the
firmware of the plaintiff’s products. However, the court upheld an
auxiliary claim raised by AVM (which was based on unfair competition
law) and banned Cybits from distributing SurfSitter where the use of the
software caused the Fritz!Box web interface to display a wrong status of
the Internet connection and web-filtering software.

The court based its ruling on considerations that were not always
entirely clear but seem to come down to the following:

The court considered the firmware a collective work/compilation of
several programs, including the kernel programs. Therefore, the entire
collective work/compilation fell within the scope of the GPLv2.
Consequently, the plaintiff was barred from relying on the firmware as a
whole as a basis for its copyright claims (“Danach stehen der Klägerin
an der Firmware als Ganzes … keine urheberrechtlichen
Unterlassungsansprüche zu”, which could be translated as “The plaintiff
has no copyrights in the firmware as a whole enabling AVM to ask for
injunctive relief.”). The ruling has come under heavy fire, in
particular because of its nebulous language possibly suggesting that
collective works/compilations with pre-existing GPLv2-licensed
components must always be licensed in their entirety under the GPLv2:
Rather than providing for such far-reaching consequences, section 2 of
the GPLv2 merely prohibits the holder of rights in the collective
work/compilation from compromising any of the users' freedoms to use,
copy, distribute, or modify the pre-existing GPLv2-components. [^300]

However, according to the court, distributing SurfSitter constituted an
act of unfair competition, insofar as causing the routers to display
wrong status messages may confuse the user, which could be detrimental
to AVM’s reputation as the producer of the Fritz!Box.

### Welte v. Fantec {#_welte_v_fantec}

Most recently, the District Court of Hamburg added a few new aspects to
the picture. Fantec, a German company selling various consumer
electronic devices under its Fantec brand, had entered into a cease and
desist agreement with the holder of the exclusive rights in the software
Netfilter/iptables, which is licensed under the GPLv2. According to that
agreement, Fantec promised that it would not make available to the
public the software Netfilter/iptables without being compliant with the
conditions of the GPLv2.[^301] One of these conditions was that
Netfilter/iptables could only be made available to the public in binary
form if the “complete corresponding source code” could be accessed from
the same place, or a written offer was made to hand out that source code
on request. For each case of breaching that obligation, Fantec agreed to
pay a contractual penalty.

Two years later, Fantec was caught distributing a media player with a
Linux-based operating system that included Netfilter/iptables. It also
made the binaries of the firmware available for download. However, the
source code that could also be downloaded from Fantec’s website did not
contain Netfilter/iptables. Moreover, the source code offered was
clearly older than the source used for compilation. When Fantec received
a new cease and desist letter from the right holder, Fantec signed a new
cease and desist declaration but refused to pay (1) the contractual
penalty due under the old cease and desist agreement and (2) the
lawyer’s fees incurred for sending the cease and desist letter.
Moreover, Fantec was not willing to give full information on sales
figures, customers, etc.

The right holder brought an action at the court in Hamburg demanding
payment of the contractual penalty and the legal fees and for full
information. The court decided in the plaintiff’s favor. It held that
Fantec had breached its duty of offering the complete corresponding
source code along with the binary of the software. It emphasized that
Fantec had not met its duty to verify that its products did not infringe
on any third party’s rights and had therefore acted negligently.
Consequently, Fantec was ordered to pay the contractual penalty.
Moreover, the court also confirmed that violating GPLv2 conditions
amounted to copyright infringement and confirmed on this basis that
Fantec had to indemnify the right holder for its legal costs and had to
give the requested information. The court pointed out that by not
including Netfilter/iptables in its source code, Fantec had failed to
comply with its obligation to offer the complete corresponding source
code.

Fantec appealed the decision but withdrew its appeal when the right
holder agreed to waive its right to receive the requested information.

### Xt:commerce {#_xt_commerce}

The Higher Regional Court of Düsseldorf (Oberlandesgericht Düsseldorf)
is responsible for two important decisions dealing with the tricky issue
of using trade marks for FOSS.[^302] In the first of the cases, the
plaintiff owned a word/figurative trade mark containing the phrase
“xt:Commerce” for software, development of software, and software
support. It distributed a computer program that was licensed under the
GNU General Public License, using the name “xt:Commerce”. The defendant
offered on the market, inter alia, its own reproductions of the
xt:Commerce software, also using that name. The plaintiff, relaying on
its trade mark, asked the court to enjoin the defendant from doing so.
The court granted the relief sought, arguing that the GPL only conveyed
licenses under copyright, but not under trade mark law. If someone
desired to distribute her own copies of GPL software, she may do so
under the GPL, but only under a name that did not infringe on third
parties' trade mark rights.

### Enigma {#_enigma}

Two years later, in 2012, the same court addressed some more complex
questions.[^303]

The plaintiff, DP GmbH (DP), was the owner of the community trade mark
“Enigma” which is protected for operating systems, drivers,
set-top-boxes, satellite receivers, and digital TV receivers. Its sister
company, DM GmbH (DM), distributed set top boxes whose firmware was
based on GNU/Linux. DM developed its own user interface, published it
under the name “Enigma” and licensed it under the GNU General Public
License, version 2 (GPLv2). Since 2006, DM had distributed a new version
of this user interface, called “Enigma 2.” “Enigma” and “Enigma 2” were
used by numerous manufacturers for their own set top boxes.

The defendant S GmbH distributed a set top box that used Enigma 2, but
with several adaptations to S’s hardware. S advertised its device with
the words “fully equipped HDTV Tuner PVR with Linux Enigma 2 operating
system.” The product description contained the following language: “400
MHz CPU + Linux OS Enigma 2 + Internal HDD (2.5/3.5) + Twin DVB-S2 Tuner
+ E-SATA/ 3 x USB…”. Moreover, when a user clicked on “About,” a window
popped up with information about the precise software status, including
a reference to “Enigma.”

The plaintiff argued that the situation described above infringed its
community trade mark. The Higher Regional Court of Düsseldorf disagreed
and provided the following arguments:

According to the court, S had not used the term “Enigma” as a trade
mark — as required by art. 9 para 1 b) of the Community Trade Mark
Regulation (CTMR) — but only as the title of the work (Werktitel[^304]).
Using “Enigma 2” as described above thus did not indicate the origin of
the software. Rather, consumers understood this as a necessary
identifier of the software itself.

The court continued that in any event, the way S had used the term
“Enigma 2” would be permitted by art. 12 b) of the CTMR: The title
“Enigma 2” was used by S in order to inform (potential) customers about
the characteristics of their products. Moreover, as the software
“Enigma” / “Enigma 2” was utilized by numerous companies under the
license conditions of the GPLv2, the relevant public had gotten used to
“Enigma” being the name of a certain software product associated with a
wider range of sources.

Even if customers did not have this understanding of the term “Enigma”
the prerequisites of art. 12 b) of the CMTR would have been met, the
court held. Under the GPLv2, S was allowed to reproduce the work called
“Enigma” / “Enigma 2”. In such a case, S must also be permitted to
identify this work, which can only be done by using its name. Here, the
court used an interesting analogy to an older decision of the BGH: In
2000, the BGH had held that once a work had entered the public domain,
anyone was permitted to use this work’s title, even if this title was
registered as a trade mark.[^305] According to the Düsseldorf court, the
situation is similar when a work may be used by anyone under a free
license.

The court went even further and held that use of the trade marked
software title could also be justified if the software was — to a
certain degree — modified. The court recognized that software may not be
used on different types of hardware without being subject to some
adaptations. Therefore, the use of its (trademarked) title should even
be lawful when the program had been adjusted to the technical
environment it was used in. Even making use of the software title for a
program with certain new functions would be covered by art. 12 b) CTMR,
as long as the essential functions of the original software were
sustained, and pre-existing third-party plug-ins still worked with the
software.

Importantly, the court emphasized that the principles stated above apply
only so long as the user meets all the license conditions of the GPLv2.
Otherwise, using the trademarked title would not be in accordance with
honest practices in industrial or commercial matters.

Moreover, it should be noted that the ruling covers only the simple use
of a work title as an indispensable identifier of the software used;
therefore, the principles above cannot justify any form of use going
beyond the narrow scope described in the decision.

### Other cases {#_other_cases}

In a number of other cases, German courts have granted preliminary
injunctions against producers and distributors of products that violated
the GPLv2 terms. Apart from one case[^306] the decisions generally do
not provide an explanation of the court reasoning, as is often the case
in preliminary injunction proceedings. The exception mentioned did not
add anything new from a doctrinal perspective, but confirmed a few of
the arguments set forth above: most importantly, that sec. 4 GPLv2 leads
to an automatic loss of any rights of use in case of license violations;
that even if the GPLv2 was not part of an agreement between the parties,
no rights would be granted to the infringer; and that the right holder’s
rights were not exhausted since the first distribution of the copies at
hand had occurred without his consent.

### Recommended literature {#_recommended_literature_2}

#### Recommended literature in English {#_recommended_literature_in_english}

-   J. Höppner: The GPL prevails: An analysis of the first-ever Court
    decision on the validity and effectivity of the GPL,
    <http://www.law.ed.ac.uk/ahrc/script-ed/issue4/GPL-case.asp>

-   T. Jaeger: Enforcement of the GNU GPL in Germany and Europe,1 (2010)
    JIPITEC 34,
    <http://www.jipitec.eu/issues/jipitec-1-1-2010/2419/dippadm1268746871.43.pdf>

-   A. Metzger, T. Jaeger: Open Source Software and German Copyright
    Law, IIC Vol. 32, 2001, p.52,
    <http://www.ifross.org/publikation/open-source-software-and-german-copyright-law>

-   H. Picot, A. Duisberg: A review of German case law on the GNU
    General Public License,
    <http://www.twobirds.com/en/news/articles/2007/review-german-gnu-general-public-license>

#### Recommended literature in German {#_recommended_literature_in_german}

Over the course of the years, an increasing number of articles on legal
aspects of free software under German law have been published. Please
see for an overview:

-   <http://www.ifross.org/en/publikationen/publikationen-des-instituts/i-buecher-und-gutachten-ifross-mitarbeitern-open-source-so>

-   <http://www.ifross.org/en/publikationen/publikationen-des-instituts/ii-veroeffentlichungen-juristischen-fachzeitschriften-und>-

-   <http://www.ifross.org/en/publikationen/fremdpublikationen/ii-juristische-online-artikel-freier-software-und-recht/b-laendersp>

-   <http://www.ifross.org/en/publikationen/fremdpublikationen/iv-offline-materialien-freie-software-und-recht/b-laenderspezifisch>

#### Comprehensive books {#_comprehensive_books}

-   ifrOSS (ed.), Die GPL kommentiert und erklärt, available at
    <http://www.ifross.org/en/Druckfassung/Die_GPL_kommentiert_und_erklaert.pdf>

-   T. Jaeger, A. Metzger: Open Source Software — Rechtliche
    Rahmenbedingungen der Freien Software, 3rd edition, Munich 2011

-   G. Spindler (ed.): Rechtsfragen bei Open Source, Cologne 2004

Israel {#chap.israel}
======

author:\[Greenbaum,Eli\]

Introduction to software protection under Israeli law {#sec_introductionisrael}
-----------------------------------------------------

### Body of law {#sec_bodyisrael}

The Israeli Copyright Law of 2007 (the “Copyright Law”) modernized the
protection of intellectual property in Israel. The Copyright Law
replaced the prior outdated statutory framework, which consisted of both
the Copyright Ordinance of 1924 and the British Copyright Act of 1911,
the latter having been made applicable to the British Mandate in 1924
and adopted by the nascent State of Israel in 1948.[^307] The Copyright
Law expressly provides for the copyright protection of computer
programs.

A full analysis of the patent license provisions incorporated in many
free and open source software (“FOSS”) licenses is beyond the scope of
this chapter. However, it should be noted that it is possible, in
certain circumstances, to protect software under Israeli patent law. On
March 15, 2012, the Israeli Patent Authority issued new guidelines
regarding the patentability of software inventions in Israel. The new
guidelines adopt a relatively liberal approach regarding the patent
eligibility of software inventions.

### Copyright Act: Object of protection {#sec_cractisrael}

The Copyright Law expressly provides that computer programs, which are
categorized as literary works, constitute copyrightable subject matter.
The Copyright Law also provides that a computer program includes the
program “in any form that it may be expressed”. This provision is
intended to be consistent with the definition of computer programs in
Article 4 of the WIPO Copyright Treaty.[^308]

### Authors/Copyright owners {#sec_authorsisrael}

Section 34 of the Copyright Law provides that, absent an agreement to
the contrary, an employer shall be the owner of the copyright of a work
that was created by an employee “for the purpose and in the course” of
such employee’s work. As there may be circumstances where it is not
clear whether an employment relationship exists, or whether the work was
created “for the purpose and in the course of” employment within the
meaning of the statute, employment agreements in Israel frequently
contain express provisions to clarify the ownership of created works, as
well as affirmative assignments of rights. The Copyright Law takes a
different tack with respect to works for hire. Section 35(a) of the
Copyright Law provides that in the absence of an "express or implied
agreement" to the contrary, the default rule is that the creator of a
work, and not the party that commissioned the work, will be the original
owner of the copyright in a commissioned work. However, as that
provision allows an "implied" agreement to determine copyright
ownership, the default rule is less than clear. As such, it is
recommended that consulting agreements or other “work for hire”
arrangements in Israel include an express grant of the copyright to the
commissioning entity, if that is the intention of the parties.

### Compilations {#sec_compilationsisrael}

The Copyright Law also protects compilations as literary works. Section
4(b) of the Copyright Law provides that the original expression
protected in a compilation is the originality of selection or
arrangement of individual works or material in the compilation.

### Joint works {#sec_jointisrael}

The Copyright Law recognizes the possibility of joint works but does not
expressly provide for the manner in which joint owners in a copyright
may exploit the work. Case law has not provided a clear determination of
whether Israeli law should generally follow the rule in the United
Kingdom — such that the consent of all joint owners would be required to
license a work — or whether it should generally follow the rule in the
United States — such that each joint owner should be able to license the
work without consent of the other joint owners, subject to a duty of
accounting.[^309] As such, the right of joint owners to exploit a
jointly-owned work, including the right to grant licenses to third
parties or to individually enforce the copyright, is at present unclear
under Israeli law.

Section 54(b) of the Copyright Law requires that a plaintiff in a
copyright infringement suit join all other right holders in the suit.
This would seem to require that all joint owners of a copyright be
joined in any action to enforce a copyright.

### Derivative works {#sec_derivsisrael}

Section 16 of the Copyright Law defines a “derivative work” as an
original work that is “materially based” on another work. While not
expressly set forth in the statute, the copyright of the author of the
derivative work should extend only to the original elements of the
derivative work, while the rights of the copyright holder of the
original work should remain intact.[^310] As noted below, subject to
certain statutory exceptions, the right to create a derivative work is
one of the exclusive economic rights included in a copyright.

The question of what constitutes a “derivative work” is, of course, of
primary importance in the interpretation of the GPL, which (in very
brief summary) may potentially require the disclosure of the source code
of works that are derivative of the licensed work. To the extent the
statutory definition of a “derivative work” impacts the answer to that
question,[^311] it should be noted that the statutory test of the
Copyright Law looks to the “materiality” of the “use” that the
subsequent work makes of the protected work. This test may subtly differ
from the definition of a “derivative work” in other jurisdictions that
look to the substance of the protected work that is incorporated in the
potentially derivative work, rather than how the potentially derivative
work uses that material.

### Exclusive rights {#sec_exclusiveisrael}

Section 11 of the Copyright Law sets forth the exclusive economic rights
afforded under a copyright. All of the rights apply in the case of a
computer program. The rights include:

\(a) The right to copy the work;

\(b) The right to publish the work, if the work has not yet been
published;

\(c) The right to publicly perform the work;

\(d) The right to broadcast the work;

\(e) The right to make the work available to the public;

\(f) The right to create and a exploit derivative works; and

\(g) The right to lease the work.

Several other provisions of the Copyright Law are relevant to the
interpretation of these enumerated exclusive rights in the context of
computer programs. Section 12 of the Copyright Law provides that
technological and electronic storage of a work, as well as “temporary”
copying of a work, will also be deemed copying for purposes of the law.
These provisions bear on the possibility of infringing a copyright by
running a computer program or by accessing data over the internet.
However, Section 26 of the Copyright Law limits the exclusive right of
“temporary” copying to certain purposes and to the extent the copy
itself has significant economic value.

In addition, section 11(7) of the Copyright Law expressly provides that
the “right to lease the work” applies to computer programs. Section 17
of the Copyright Law limits this right to the lease of physical copies
of the work for commercial purposes, and provides that the right does
not include the exclusive right to lease computer programs or recordings
that are inseparable from the item that is the primary object of the
lease. As such, the exclusive right to lease a copy of a computer
program is not infringed by the lease of consumer goods that include
software.[^312]

### Exceptions to exclusive rights {#sec_exceptionsisrael}

The Copyright Law provides for certain “permitted uses” which constitute
exclusions to the exclusive rights of copyright holder enumerated above.
These include, as described in more detail below, the right to create
copies or derivative works of computer programs for the purpose of
backups, maintenance and support, fixing bugs, and ensuring
interoperability.[^313] These “permitted uses” may be exercised only by
the holder of a “lawful copy” of the program or on her behalf.

Section 24(a) of the Copyright Law provides for a right to create backup
copies. It states that that the holder of a lawful copy of a computer
program may create additional copies of such program for backup
purposes. Such copies, however, must be destroyed once the need for them
passes.

Section 24(b) of the Copyright Law provides that that the holder of a
lawful copy of a computer program may copy such program, either for the
purpose of maintenance of such program or for the purpose of maintenance
of a computer system, if such maintenance is required to use such
program. Such use is also permitted for the purpose of providing such
maintenance to the holder of a lawful copy.

Section 24(c) of the Copyright Law allows for creating both copies and
derivative works of computer programs for the purpose of fixing bugs,
interoperability and information security. Without repeating verbatim
the detailed conditions set forth in this section, it should be noted
that this section is broadly intended to allow reverse engineering and
decompilation of computer programs for the enumerated purposes.[^314] It
is not clear whether a licensee may contractually agree to forgo the
rights of “permitted uses” set forth in this section. As such, the
enforceability of common contractual terms against reverse engineering
is at present unclear under Israeli law.

### Moral rights {#sec_moralisrael}

Section 45(a) of the Copyright Law expressly provides that moral rights
do not exist in computer programs.

### Terms of protection {#sec_protectionisrael}

The term of protection for computer programs is the same as for other
works. Section 38 of the Copyright Law provides that copyright
protection in a work is for the life of the author plus 70 years,
regardless of whether the author owns the copyright. Section 39 of the
Copyright Law provides that in a joint work, the term of copyright
protection is for 70 years following the death of the last joint author.
However, the term of protection for works that were originally published
in a country outside of Israel is generally limited to the term of
protection afforded by that country.

### Copyright assignment {#sec_assignmentsisrael}

Except in the context of the employer-employee relationship, the
transfer of a copyright (or the exclusive license in respect thereof)
requires a written assignment. In contrast to the prior law, the
Copyright Law does not require that such writing be signed by the
parties, which raises the possibility that unsigned messages (such as
emails) may be sufficient to effect an assignment of a copyright.

### Enforcement {#sec_enforcementisrael}

The Copyright Law sets forth both civil and criminal penalties for the
infringement of copyrights. Civil penalties, as described in more detail
below under the heading “Legal Remedies”, can include claims for an
accounting of profits, actual damages or statutory damages. Criminal
sanctions can include imprisonment and the imposition of a statutory
fine, and generally can be imposed for infringement for the purpose of
commerce, or the sale, lease or distribution of infringing work in
commerce.

The Copyright Law also imposes a special duty on the office holders in a
corporation. Section 63 of the Copyright Law provides that office
holders must supervise employees in order to ensure that such employees
do not commit acts of infringement. Section 63(b) of the Copyright Law
sets forth a presumption that an office holder has not fulfilled his
statutory duty of supervision if any such acts of infringement are
committed. Statutory fines can be imposed on such office holders that do
not satisfy their duty of supervision.

### Technical devices and effective technological measures {#sec_devicesisrael}

The Copyright Law does not contain provisions regarding the
circumvention of technological measures implementing digital rights
management. This reflects the deliberate decision of the Israeli
parliament (the Knesset) not to include such provisions in the law. In
5097/11 Telran Communications (1986) Ltd. v Charlton Ltd., the Supreme
Court confirmed that the Copyright Law should not be interpreted as
prohibiting the circumvention of technological measures implementing
digital rights management.

It is possible, however, that the circumvention of effective
technological measures may present a criminal violation of the Computer
Law of 1995 (the “Computer Law”). Sections 2 and 7 of the Computer Law
prohibit the unauthorized disruption of the proper operation of a
computer system, or the unauthorized erasure, change or disruption of
material on the computer system. It is unclear whether the circumvention
of effective technological measures falls within the ambit of these
provisions, especially considering the Knesset’s deliberate decision not
to include express provisions regarding this issue in the Copyright Law.

Analysis of FOSS under Israeli law {#sec_analysisisrael}
----------------------------------

Under Israeli law, rights in FOSS do not differ from other forms of
copyright and patent licensing. FOSS is protected under the Copyright
Law as with any other form of software, and there is no reason to
believe that FOSS licenses would not constitute enforceable legal
contracts. As such, a breach of a FOSS license would be viewed as a
breach of a contract, and the use of FOSS in breach of a license is
likely to constitute copyright infringement.

For example, recently the Jerusalem District Court in TA 3560/09 and TA
3561/09, Reuveni v. Mapa Publishing, Ltd. enforced the terms of the
Creative Common BY-NC-ND license against a commercial defendant. The
plaintiffs, amateur photographers, had uploaded photographs to the
Internet pursuant to that license. The defendant, a commercial
publisher, published the pictures both in a book for commercial sale as
well as on its website, violating the terms of the Creative Commons
license. The Court found that, in violating the license, the defendant
had infringed the plaintiffs' copyright and ordered the defendant to pay
monetary damages. The case presents an important precedent which shows
that Israeli courts are willing to enforce the terms of open source
licenses against commercial defendants. Several questions raised by the
decision, including the issues of the contractual validity of a FOSS
licenses and how damages should be calculated in an action for
infringement of FOSS, are discussed in more detail below.

### Rights of the original co-authors {#sec_coautorsisrael}

FOSS is often developed within a collaborative development model. As
noted above, while the Copyright Law recognizes the possibility of joint
authors, it does not specifically set out the rights afforded to each of
the joint owners. This increases the importance under Israeli law of
ensuring that contributors to open source projects have executed
contribution agreements, in which they either assign or license their
contributed code to such project.

### Authors of modifications {#sec_modificationisrael}

Successive versions of FOSS may build upon the works of previous FOSS
authors. As in many other legal systems, Israeli law recognizes the
copyright of successive authors in the derivative work. This copyright
in the derivative work should be subject to the copyright of the
original author to the original work.

### Validity of FOSS licenses {#sec_validityisrael}

The Contract Law of 1973 (the “Contract Law”) provides that under
Israeli law contracts are formed through a process of offer and
acceptance. The statute details how this requirement of offer and
acceptance can be satisfied. In addition, case law has generally
emphasized the substance of contract law rather than the form and, as
such, Israeli law puts a strong emphasis on questions of good faith and
fair dealing between the parties.[^315]

Commercial license agreements generally satisfy the statutory
requirements of contract formation, in that they are often reached
through express acceptance of the terms of the license following a
process of negotiation. FOSS licenses that are reached through this
standard process of offer and acceptance should also be seen as validly
formed and should be enforced as regular contracts. In practice,
however, the acceptance of a FOSS license will frequently not involve
such a process of offer and acceptance.[^316] Often a FOSS license does
not provide for an express agreement between the parties, but merely
sets forth conditions that a licensee is required to satisfy in order to
benefit from the protection of the license.[^317] For example, FOSS code
is often made available through the Internet with the minimal statement
that it is being made available pursuant to a specific FOSS license.
Even so, Israeli contract law is likely to recognize FOSS licenses as
validly formed legal contracts. First, Section 6 of the Contract Law
expressly recognizes that contracts may be accepted through a manner of
conduct. In addition, the Standardized Contract Law of 1982 (the
“Standardized Contract Law”) generally recognizes the contractual
validity of “standardized contracts” that may be either accepted or
rejected by a counterparty.[^318] This conclusion is likely to be
bolstered by the general emphasis of Israeli law with regard to good
faith and fair dealing, since the FOSS license will be the only grant of
permission to use the FOSS work.[^319]

The plaintiffs in Reuveni (the case referenced above) did seem to
advance contractual claims when they asserted that the defendants did
not satisfy the conditions set forth in the Creative Commons
license.[^320] The court, however, did not consider the question of
whether the Creative Commons constituted an enforceable legal contract
and proceeded directly to the issues of copyright infringement and
damages. As such, the Reuveni decision leaves open the question of
whether FOSS licenses constitute enforceable legal contracts.

The Contract Law does not incorporate a requirement of consideration. As
such, questions that may arise in other jurisdictions regarding the
consideration received by the licensor in a FOSS context do not arise
under Israeli law.

### Termination {#sec_terminationisrael}

As noted above, Israeli law generally interprets licenses according to
the standard rules of contract law. As such, a license that does not
contain an express term may be terminated by the licensor by providing
reasonable prior notice. What constitutes “reasonable” prior notice
varies on a case-by-case basis according to the circumstances, and is
ultimately a question determined by the court. FOSS licenses do not
generally contain an express term and are generally granted for an
indefinite period of time. As such, Israeli law presents the risk that a
FOSS licensor can terminate a FOSS license upon reasonable notice.[^321]

### Waiver and liability {#sec_waiverisrael}

FOSS licenses typically contain strong disclaimers of warranties and
liability. The enforceability of such broad disclaimers under Israeli
statutory law is not entirely clear, and the case law has not yet
considered the application of broad disclaimers in the software
licensing context. However, it is important to note under Israeli law
that such disclaimers may be entirely reasonable for FOSS that is made
freely available without charge, especially considering that the author
of such works may not have any control over the actual distribution or
use of her work.

Israeli law provides for certain implied warranties in the context of a
sale of goods, services or rights, including with regard to rights in
intellectual property.[^322] For example, Section 11(3) of the Sale Law
of 1968 (the “Sale Law”) generally provides for implied warranties of
“regular or commercial use or any other special purpose that may be
implied by agreement”. These implied contract terms are similar but not
equivalent to the implied warranties of merchantability and fitness for
a particular purpose provided by the Uniform Commercial Code.
Additionally, Section 18(a) of the Sale Law provides for an implied
warranty of non-infringement. These provisions of the Sale Law predate
the significant development of the Israeli high-tech industry and do not
seem to have been directed towards the problems raised by intellectual
property licenses generally and software licenses in particular. In
addition, Israeli case law regarding the application of these statutory
provisions to intellectual property is sparse.

The ability of contracting parties to entirely disclaim such implied
warranties is not entirely clear. Section 4(b) of the Sale Law provides
that warranties will be implied only in the absence of any agreement to
the contrary between the parties. At the same time, however, the
Standardized Contract Law provides that a court may ignore or change
unconscionable terms in a “standardized contract”, and Section 4(1) of
that statute provides for a presumption that contractual terms limiting
liability in a “standardized contract” will be deemed unconscionable.
FOSS licenses, in that they are typically drafted in advance by the
licensor for an indefinite number of licensees who are not able to
negotiate the terms of the license, facially fit the statutory
definition of a “standardized contract.” As noted above, however, broad
disclaimers of liability and warranty may be entirely appropriate in the
FOSS context. The enforceability of such disclaimers in the software
licensing context in general and for FOSS licenses in particular has not
yet been examined by Israeli case law.

Licensors should note that Section 16 of the Sale Law provides that the
implied warranties of merchantability and fitness for a particular
purpose may not be disclaimed if the non-conformity results from facts
that the seller “knows or has reason to know of”. While not explicit in
the statute, this provision may also apply to the implied warranty of
non-infringement.[^323] Again, the application of these provisions to
the licensing of intellectual property has not been satisfactorily
explored in Israeli case law.

Remedies {#sec_remediesisrael}
--------

### Copyright infringement — damages {#sec_infringementisrael}

Under Israeli law, a copyright holder may be entitled to either an
accounting of profits or damages (whether actual or statutory) for the
infringement of a copyright.[^324] Criminal penalties may also be
generally imposed with regard to infringements of copyright in commerce,
but a full discussion of such criminal penalties is beyond the scope of
this article.

In an accounting of profits, the plaintiff is entitled to receive the
profits obtained as a result of the infringement of the copyrighted
work. Often only a part of the defendant’s work is based on the
infringed work, and in such event a court must determine what proportion
of profits should be allocated to the infringed work. Though the
question has not yet been addressed by case law, it seems that an
infringer of software (including FOSS) should similarly be entitled to
an accounting of profits of the infringing party.[^325]

Actual damages may be difficult to assess in a suit for FOSS
infringement, especially where the work is generally made available free
of charge. In addition to actual damages, however, the Copyright Law
also provides for the possibility of statutory damages in the amount of
up to 100,000 New Israeli Shekels for each instance of infringement,
without any requirement to prove actual damages. A court generally has
wide latitude in setting the amount of statutory damages. Section 56(b)
of the Copyright Law sets out factors that for the court to consider in
this regard. Factors applicable to the infringement of FOSS may include
the damage caused to the copyright holder, the profits of the infringing
party and whether the infringing party acted in good faith.

FOSS copyright owners may find claims for statutory damages easier to
assert than attempting to prove actual damages. The plaintiffs in
Reuveni, for example, asserted a successful claim for statutory damages.
At the same time, the court in Reuveni, in setting the amount of
statutory damages, also took into account the fact that the plaintiffs
were amateur hobbyists who did not expect to profit from the copyrighted
works and who, in fact, did not suffer material economic damage from the
infringement. In light of these factors, the court awarded the
plaintiffs substantially less than the 100,000 NIS ceiling per
infringement. The court distinguished the facts in Reuveni from another
case where the infringed work was the well-known photo of a professional
photographer and where the court had awarded substantially higher
statutory damages per infringement. While FOSS copyright holders are
often professional programmers or engineers, FOSS is often provided free
of charge by the copyright holder with little or no expectation of
economic gain. As such, the factors enumerated in Reuveni may prove
relevant to the calculation of statutory damages in future FOSS
infringement actions.

Section 60(c) of the Copyright Law may restrict the remedies available
against a licensee in good faith of intellectual property. While Section
60 of the Copyright law sets forth certain actions that a court may
order in respect of an infringing work, Section 60(c) subjects these
provisions to the “market overt rule” set forth in Section 34 of the
Sale Law. Subject to the conditions of the statute, the “market overt
rule” provides that the purchaser of an item in good faith obtains good
title regardless of whether the vendor itself can pass on good title. As
such, an owner of intellectual property may be restricted in his ability
to file suit against the end users of pirated or infringing intellectual
property, and may only be able to file suit against the providers such
infringing works.

### Contract remedies — injunction {#sec_injunctionsisrael}

Section 53 of the Copyright Law provides that the holder of a copyright
is entitled to obtain an injunction against an infringer, “unless the
court determines that justifications exist for denying such an
injunction.” Israeli courts may also grant temporary injunctions against
infringers. [^326] The grant of an injunction may prove of central
importance to the licensor of open source software, especially given the
difficulty of proving actual damages. The plaintiffs in Reuveni had
dropped their demand for an injunction, and the court in that case
opined that the course of events would have in any event mooted such a
demand. Nonetheless, the court seemed to state that it would have been
prepared to consider such a demand had it been raised by the plaintiffs.

### Contract remedies — specific performance {#sec_contremediesisrael}

In addition to an infringement claim, copyright holders may also bring
an action for breach of contract. Specific performance is a remedy
theoretically available under Israeli law for the breach of contract.
Section 3 of the Contract Law (Remedies for Breach) of 1970 expressly
provides for the availability of this remedy to the non-breaching party,
and a long tradition of Israeli case law has emphasized the importance
of specific performance as a remedy for breach of contract.[^327] This
approach contrasts strongly with the common law tradition of favoring an
award of monetary damages rather than specific performance of the
contract.

As such, to the extent contractual remedies are available for breach of
an open-source license, licensees may find themselves exposed to the
possibility of orders for specific performance. Such orders could
include, for example under the terms of the GPL, an injunction to
release the source code of the licensee’s work. Licensees that have
discounted the possibility of such injunctions under the rules of other
legal systems should be aware of this possibility under Israeli law.

Italy {#chap.italy}
=====

author:\[Piana,Carlo\] author:\[Aliprandi,Simone\]

Body of law {#_body_of_law}
-----------

Copyright protection of software is regulated in Italy under a few
articles added to the general Italian Copyright Law (precisely “Legge n.
633 del 22 aprile 1941”) under the Legislative Degree no. 518 dated 29
December 1992. This reform transposes the Council Directive of 14 May
1991 on the Legal Protection of Computer Programs (91/250/EEC) into
Italian national law (hereinafter referred to as the “Software
Directive”).

Now the Italian Copyright Law has a section in chapter IV specifically
on software: namely, Section VI, comprising articles 64 bis, 64 ter, and
64 quarter.

### Software Act: Object of protection {#sec_italy_Software_Act_Object_of_protection}

Computer programs (including the preparatory material) are protected by
copyright and are equivalent to literary works within the meaning of the
Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works.
According to article 2, no. 8, of the Italian Copyright Law software
programs are protected in whatsoever form, insofar as they are original
and result from the intellectual creative activity of the author. The
ideas and principles on which software programs are based, including
those on which their interfaces are based, are excluded from protection.
The concept of “program” includes also the preparatory material of the
same.

### Authors/Beneficiaries {#sec_italy_AuthorsBeneficiaries}

The general principle of Italian copyright law provides that the
copyrights in a work belong to the author. Article 64 ter however
provides that — unless stipulated otherwise — the employer holdes the
exclusive right to exploit the program (or of the data base) created by
the employee while performing his/her job or working under instructions
from the employer. According to a very reliable doctrine, however, also
in case of “work for hire”, i.e. when software development occurs under
the performance of a development agreement and is paid by the client,
the exploitation rights are assigned to the contracting party.[^328]

### Exclusive rights {#sec_italy_Exclusive_rights}

According to article 64 bis of the Italian Copyright Law the
exploitation rights comprise the exclusive right to perform or
authorize:

> \(a) the temporary or permanent reproduction of the computer program by
> any means or in any form. Insofar as acts like the uploading,
> displaying, execution, transmission or storage of a software program
> require its reproduction, those acts are also subject to the
> authorization of the copyright holder; (b) the translation, adaptation,
> transformation and any other modification of the computer program,
> including the reproduction of the resulting program \[in other words,
> creating a derivative work\], without prejudice to the author of the
> modification; (c) any form of public distribution, including lending the
> original computer program or copies thereof. The first sale within the
> \[the European Union\] exhausts the right to further control the
> distribution of such copy within the \[European Union\], with the
> exception of the right to control the further lending of the program or
> of a copy thereof.

### Exceptions to exclusive rights {#sec_italy_ExceptionstoExclusiveRights}

Article 64 ter of the law expressly provides that:

> in the absence of any contrary stipulation, authorization from the
> copyright holder shall not be required for the activities as per
> subheadings a) and b) of article 64 bis, whenever such activities are
> necessary for the program to be used, for its designated purpose, by
> the person who legally purchased it, including for the correction of
> errors. Whoever is entitled to use a copy of the computer program may
> not be prevented by contractual means from making a backup copy of
> that program, where this is necessary for its use. Whoever is entitled
> to use a copy of the computer program may, without being authorised by
> the copyright holder, evaluate, study or test the operation of such
> program in order to identify the ideas and principles underlying each
> component of that program, provided he carries out such acts during
> the course of loading, visualization, execution, transmission or
> storage of the program which he/she is entitled to perform. Any
> contractual stipulation conflicting with the provisions of this
> paragraph is null and void.

### Moral rights {#sec_italy_Moralrights}

The Italian copyright system is a *droit d’auteur* one, where moral
rights are particularly strong. Worth noting are:

-   The right to be acknowledged as the author of the work (Art. 20, 21)

-   The right to object to modifications or alterations which are
    prejudicial to the honour or reputation of the author (Art. 20)

-   The right to withdraw the work from distribution, when high moral
    reasons exist, subject to indemnification of those who have acquired
    the right to exploit the work (Art. 164).

Article 20 provides for two separate rights:

> independently of the exclusive rights of economic utilization of the
> work referred to in the provisions of the preceding Section, and even
> after the transfer of such rights, the author shall retain the right
> to *claim authorship* of the work and to *object* to any distortion,
> mutilation or any other modification of, and other derogatory action
> in relation to, the said work, which would be prejudicial to his
> honour or reputation.

While the right to claim authorship does not raise any practical
concern, the right to object to any distortion has been cited sometimes
as a possible restriction to the working of a FOSS license, because the
author at any point in time could *de facto* revoke his or her
permission to modify the program, in stark contradiction to the
provisions of any FOSS license. However, on the one hand this right is
limited to very serious alterations of the work, as they must be
detrimental to the honor or reputation of the author. In addition,
according to Art. 22, if the author is aware of and acceps the
modifications he has no right to object to them. Finally, we argue that
this provision is not applicable to software because of its rationale,
which is to protect the “sprit” of the artist which lives in rtistic
works, spirit which are far less arguable in a software work. There is
no known case in Italy dealing with the application of such rights to
software. Many authors are inclined to think that since there is no
specific exception for software, and since the rules are of general
application, they also apply to software. But this rather formal
argument does not seem convincing, as the same is quite patently
inapplicable in certain instances of copyright law, such as the *sui
generis* database rights. Besides, because the copyright provisions in
the Italian copyright law are formally an implementation of a Directive
for the harmonization of the internal market, it is arguable that such
an impediment to harmonization — that could prejudice the exploitation
of software works — may only be based on grounds that supersede the
European legislative powers and should receive restrictive
interpretation.

Article 22 provides that these moral rights are non-transferable and
Art. 23 provides that they have no time limitation, as after the
author’s death they may at any point in time be exerted by the heirs of
the author.

A further moral right is the right to *withdraw the work* from
distribution when high moral reasons exist (Art. 142). This provision
has the same rationale as the one in Art. 20, and again it reflects the
fact that an author can have very serious moral involvement with his or
her own works, so that the distribution of said works can be highly
prejudicial to his or her reputation or other aspects of the *droit
moral* of the author. It is therefore arguable that the right to
withdraw the work does not apply to software for the same reasons we put
forward for Art. 20. At any rate, the need to indemnify the
rightsholders (including licensees) who would be damaged by the
withdrawal, and the cumbersome procedure provided for it by the law,
relegates this hypothesis to the realm of intellectual exercise without
practical bearings.

### Term of protection {#sec_italy_Termofprotection}

The same term as for works of literature and art applies: 70 years as of
January 1 following the death of the author.[^329] In case of
co-authorship the death of the latest surviving author is taken into
account.

### Copyright assignment {#sec_italy_Copyrightassignment}

Copyright assignment is not expressly regulated by Italian Law for any
copyrightable subject, except for works created under an
employer/employee relationship, as mentioned above. By the way, this is
not considered a case of assignment, but a case where the rights to
exploit the work are vested in the employer by virtue of the law. We
have also already mentioned that in the case of work for hire the
copyright of the resulting work has to be attributed — depending on
circumstances and unless different stipulations exist — to the
contracting entity, as this is the normal working of the rules of
contracts (*“contratto d’appalto”*). In the case of unpaid contributors,
without an express agreement the copyrights will be vested in the
authors, as the general rules apply.

Moral rights cannot be assigned and any agreement to the contrary is
null and void. All other rights can be assigned and transferred without
limitation (Art. 107 of Italian Copyright Law), save for certain express
provisions under a the publishing agreement. The only requirement is
that the agreement must be proved in writing (Art. 110).

### Special measures {#sec_italy_SpecialMeasures}

The Italian Copyright Law refers to the general copyright principles
regarding measures for enforcing software copyrights. Besides these
general measures, a specific criminal sanction has been created for
those who bring into trade or possess for commercial purposes a copy of
a computer program. Article 171 bis, subsection 1, of the Italian
Copyright Law provides that:

> whoever unlawfully duplicates computer programs for purposes of gain,
> or imports, distributes, sells, detains for commercial purposes or
> leases the said programs, for the selfsame purposes and being aware or
> having reason to be aware of the fact that such copies were not
> authorized, shall be punished by imprisonment for between three months
> and three years and by a fine of between 500,000 and 6,000,000 Liras
> \[1 euro = 1936.27 Liras\]. The same punishment shall be not less than
> imprisonment for six months and a fine of 1,000,000 Liras if the
> offence is serious or if the program which was unlawfully duplicated,
> imported, distributed, sold, detained for commercial purposes or
> leased had been previously distributed, sold or leased on media
> bearing the mark of the Italian Authors' and Publishers' Association
> \[SIAE\] pursuant to this law and to the relevant Regulations as per
> Royal Decree no. 1369 of May 18, 1942.

Unprotected software and public domain software {#sec_italy_Unprotectedsoftwareandpublicdomainsoftware}
-----------------------------------------------

Italian Copyright Law lays down that, in order to be protected, a work
must have a minimal creative character, which must have at least two
components: novelty and originality. This applies also to software,
although as a matter of fact — excluding utterly simple computer
programs or very basic scripts, as well as interface definition
files — it would be hard for a judge to rule that a software application
fails to have sufficient creative character.

A public domain status exists *ex lege* when the copyright expires,
i.e., 70 years after the death of the longest surviving author. In
practical terms this is so far ahead of it becoming relevant that
discussing it would be futile at the time of writing. In theory, nothing
prevents a rightholder from relinquishing her rights, but as we have
seen, some of the moral rights are actually non-disposable; therefore it
is impossible for a copyrighted item in Italy to have a truly public
domain status. If for the purpose of our analysis we redefine “public
domain” for this purpose into “devoid of any exploitation rights”, then
a public domain status is achievable by an act of dedication to the
public domain of the rightsholder.

Analysis of FOSS under Italian law {#sec_italy_AnalysisofFOSSunderItalianLaw}
----------------------------------

### Copyrights {#sec_italy_Copyrights}

Although FOSS can be written by a single person or be owned by a single
legal entity,[^330] after some time software is the result of the work
of several authors who can lay claim to it. The question is whether
later additions create a collaborative work (a work created by
collaborating authors), or whether the original software is the final
work and every contribution created during the further development of
the software i a derivative work. The legal consequences are different
in each case.

#### Qualification of FOSS {#_qualification_of_foss_4}

There is no way to determine whether a FOSS work is a collective work, a
complex work or else, and each version of the software can be classified
differently depending on how the work was made. Many combinations can
ensue. The simplest scenario is the one in which the software was made
by author A, taken by author B and then by author C. A, B and C have
each modified and extended the software. This is a collective effort,
but technically it consists of a series of derivatives, each one being
technically copyright of the resepective author, who relies on the
upstream permission in the chain of development. Usually the scenario is
more complex, as the contributions of the individual authors are
committed into the release by means of a code management system through
which concurrent development is made.

Whereas the first version of the software, if written by several people,
can in many cases be qualified as a collaborative work where the
different contributions are indistiguishable, this seems much less the
case for the later versions, which are based on the original work,
without, however, there being any “consultation” between the authors.
These later versions will be qualified as derivative works. Therefore,
in terms of the legal consequences, a distinction needs to be made
between the rights of the original co-authors and the rights of people
who carry on developing the original work.

According to a sound theory in Italy, this way of working constitutes a
“complex work”, in other words a work in which “\[…\] the individual
contributions have their own autonomy, which enables their separate
exploitation, and nevertheless they are shaped in a way that, as a final
result of the cooperation, they result as essential elements of an
organic *ensemble* where the individual contributions express themselves
as a whole, creating an unitary artistic effect”. This definition is
geared towards artistic works (such as movies) where the contributions
are different in nature (like the photography, the direction, the story,
the writing of the screenplay, etc.), while in software programming the
elements are more of the same nature.

#### Rights of the original co-authors {#_rights_of_the_original_co_authors_3}

Unless the components of the software can be clearly distinguished *and*
separate, software made collaborative is usually considered an
“indivisible work”[^331]. This involves works whereby it cannot be
concluded clearly what the individual contribution of every author is,
e.g. when two authors write a text together. In the case of indivisible
works the authors are free to regulate the exercise of the copyrights by
agreement. This freedom is very far reaching. The co-authors can agree
how the program is made public (e.g. as “FOSS”) and how decisions
regarding the copyrights are made, e.g. by normal or special majorities,
or by giving one of them the right to take all the decisions regarding
this work (limited to acts of ordinary administration).[^332]

If the co-authors have not reached an agreement as to how decisions are
made (insofar as the law allows them to regulate the co-authors'
decision-making process) the rules laid down by Art. 1105-1110 of the
Italian Civil Code apply. The main rule is that any act that does not
involve disposing of the copyright and that does not prevent the
co-owners to exert their rights is allowed, but acts of “extraordinary
administration” must be voted according to the majorities laid down by
the law or agreed upon by the parties. Parties disagreeing can oppose
the decisions of the majority in Court.[^333]

#### FOSS and derivative works under Italian law {#_foss_and_derivative_works_under_italian_law}

Italian law does not expressly mention “derivative works”, but it deals
with “creative elaborations”. It may be only a nuance, a reflection of
the nature of the Italian law in the *droit d’auteur* system, but it is
worth noting.

Art. 4 of the Italian Copyright Law provides that

> Without prejudice to the rights in the original work, elaborations of
> a creative character of any such work, such as translations into
> another language, transformations into any other literary or artistic
> form, modifications and additions constituting a substantial recasting
> of the original work, adaptions, reductions, abridgements and
> variations which do not constitute an original work, shall also be
> protected.

#### The assignment of copyrights {#_the_assignment_of_copyrights_3}

Assignment of copyrights in FOSS licensing does not pose any particular
challenge or differ greatly from the general working concept of
assignment. The virtual absence of distributed all-Italian collaborative
FOSS projects makes it difficult to predicate any characteristic of the
assignment of copyrights in practice, for lack of examples. A field
where all-Italian FOSS projects exist is the public administration
sector, which is however governed by certain specific rules (such as the
reuse principle and compulsory clauses in ad-hoc software development)
meaning that it would require a much wider and separate discussion.

### Moral rights {#sec_italy_Moralrights2}

Moral rights could play a dangerous role in FOSS, which for instance
prohibits of field-of-use restrictions. In discussion groups arguments
can be found in favour of applying moral rights in order to object to
military or nuclear power-related use of software) and the Freedom to
improve and adapt the software, which empowers anybody to make changes
to the software. If these change are made to port an application to a
field of use that can affect the reputation or the morals of the
original author, arguably this could trigger the use of moral rights to
object to such modifications of the work. Reference is made to the
section on moral rights above above for an argument against the
applicability of the moral rights to software.

### Enforcing FOSS licenses {#sec_italy_EnforcingFOSSlicenses}

There is little doubt that a FOSS license is enforceable in Italy,
except in marginal cases. The same reasoning as in Welte v. Skype[^334]
would apply. Regardless of whether the license is a contract or a bare
copyright license,[^335] copyright can be considered a general
prohibition barring unrestricted use of the software. Therefore other
than the license, nothing permits the use of copyright, and the absence
of a license would defeat any arguments by an infringer directed at
voiding the license.

In other words, in a FOSS license enforcement case the alleged infringer
cannot invoke the nullity of the license and at the same time argue that
the use was legitimate under the same license, unless there is another
legal theory that permits said infringer to use the software. For
instance, if the infringer claims that the obligation to release the
modified source code is unenforceable because, e.g., the GNU GPL is
null, and this is a condition to use the software according the same GNU
GPL, this argument will fall flat on its face, because it would result
in claiming that the use by the alleged infringer was not permitted at
all.

But what about actually enforcing an obligation? Such as, in the above
example, actually enforcing the disclosure of the modified source code
if the alleged infringer refused to perform such obligation (or to meet
such condition). In theory, a licensee could be forced to do something
which is provided for by a contractual obligation. Under Italian law,
this is in general possible under Art. 2931 of the Italian Civil Code.
To trigger such provision, a contractual obligation must exist, a
“positive” one (of doing or giving something), whereas a “condition” is
not sufficient. Most FOSS licenses just set out the conditions that must
be met in order to permit the four liberties, and also the copyleft
clauses are laid down more as true conditions than as obligations.
Therefore it is hard, and not necessary, to construe a contractual
obligation. There are exceptions, though, to this finding. Two examples
come to mind: explicit downstream patent licenses (as in the Mozilla
Public License) and liability disclaimers.

Downstream patent licenses state that the contributor (sometimes the
distributor, as with the GNU General Public License v.3[^336]) of
software will explicitly provide all downstream recipient of the
software it distributes with a worldwide royalty-free patent license for
the patents it owns or controls. This is a positive effect of the
license. However, this is strictly speaking not a result of the inbound
license from the upstream, but a result of distribution (or
“conveyance”) of software under the same public license, which is a
separate act of licensing. In fact, without distribution, the grant is
not applicable, and the act of granting itself is conceived not as an
obligation to grant, but as a direct grant embedded in the license.
Again, there is no need to construe a valid contractual obligation to
make the patent grant work.

Similarly, all licenses provide for a liability disclaimer, which again
is not an obligation, but an effect of the license, or a waiver. This is
a focal point and needs to be dealt with more in depth.

### Waiver and liability {#sec_italy_Waiverandliability}

Typically, FOSS licenses contain very strong disclaimer clauses, which
discharge the author from all liability.[^337] The reason for this is
that FOSS is often made available without monetary compensation of any
sort, as a result of which the author generates insufficient income to
pay for liability insurances and legal costs.[^338]

Under Italian law there is a first issue. According to Art. 1229 of the
Italian Civil Code, no disclaimer of liability can be made to the effect
of excluding liability for gross negligence or willful acts. Any
provisions to the contrary are null and void (although the overall
agreement may remain valid). The nullity can be declared *ex officio*
without a specific demand from the parties (Art. 1421 ICC), but it must
be instrumental to a demand made by the parties. Therefore, the
provisions of the licenses are null and void insofar as they
unconditionally exclude all liability without making such distinction.
However, the invalidity does not extend to the contractual clauses that
are not affected by the nullity (art. 1429 ICC) and in any case the
clauses that are null and void can be converted into different clauses
with similar effect, such as the parties would have wanted if they had
been aware of the nullity (Art. 1424 ICC). All those rules should be
read in the light of the license quite likely being a unilateral act
(Art. 1424 ICC).

Should the disclaimer be ineffective, could a software developer be
liable for damages caused by his or her software, under Italian law, in
the light of the fact that his or her software is released for free
(under the FOSS license)? Apart from the cases of gross liability and
wilful acts, or a liability in tort, the answer seems negative. On
contractual grounds it is impossible to determine a liability. A license
is just that, a permission, therefore it does not impose any obligation
to deliver anything upon the developer. Suppose that somebody wants to
integrate the software in a larger product for a particular scope, and
the software is unfit to it. The integrator is then permitted and
invited to do all the modifications, including the adaptations and
quality assurance activities, to make sure that the combination works.
There is a considerable difference between this case and a proprietary
software license. In proprietary software licensing consideration is
exchanged against delivery of the software or even permission to use
software, is a *sale* (Art. 1471 ICC). Being a sale, it bears certain
statutory warranties, including the product being free from defects that
reduce its intended use (Art. 1490 ICC). But the same cannot apply to
FOSS, which is not “sold” — unless there is a separate agreement on that
particular piece of code — but just offered for perusal. If there is a
separate agreement, such as a software development agreement, the
relationship between the client and the developer — in particular the
liability for defective software — is governed by this specific contract
and not by the license.

A liability cannot be construed on the basis of product liability rules
as well, because product liability would invariably arise from a defect
in a physical item, and without a contractual link other than the
license, the developer cannot reasonably be considered the “provider”.
At any rate, any such limitation would be void outright if the product
liability law were applicable (Art. 124 of the Italian Consumers Code).

A tort liability would also be hard to find and the onus would be
entirely on the plaintiff. Art. 1227 of the Italian Civil Code provides
that damages are not due insofar as they could have been avoided on duly
exercising diligence. But, more than that, it must be established that
the damage has been caused by an unlawful act (i.e. an act against the
law and conflicting with the conduct expected by an average subject).
Now, the “exchange” between the developer and the user is “I give you
the Freedoms, but the code is all you get, not a product, mind that I
don’t guarantee anything”. It is generally understood that because the
exchange is gratuitous, the avoidance of liability flows naturally from
said act (again, except the case of gross negligence) unless a warranty
is expressly given.[^339] All this makes it particularly difficult to
construe a solid case for tort liability of large proportions, and in
any case there is no pre-made contractual language that can prevent it,
especially because Art. 1225 of the Italian Civil Code limits maximum
liability to what could have been reasonably expected when the
obligation arose.

Liability for lack of title is also a possibility. Releasing software as
FOSS by an upstream provider is an act upon which third parties might
rely for downstream re-licensing. If there is a gap in the chain of
title, that could mean that the lower end of the chain suffers losses,
e.g. because of litigation it suffers from upstream, even if no
knowledge of any infringement existed. Can this distributor of software
demand to be indemnified by its software provider who has “obfuscated”
the real status of the copyright title of that particular piece of code?
Such indemnification is hard to construe, because there is no
contractual link between the party requesting indemnification and its
upstream provider. What remains, in the absence of express warranties
and representation, is a non contractual liability. Certainly the
licenses have no warranties and representation — indeed the contrary is
the case.

Any downstream developer or integrator must do its own due diligence or
require other kinds of warranties and representations from its
upstream — or better, do both. Indeed, that of providing certain levels
of indemnification for FOSS is a business case for some companies.

### The copyleft principle {#sec_italy_Thecopyleftprinciple}

#### Principle {#_principle_4}

A characteristic found in many (but not all[^340]) FOSS licenses is the
so-called “copyleft” principle. FOSS licenses which incorporate the
copyleft principle,[^341] lay down by contract that everyone in the
chain of consecutive users, in return for the right of use that is
assigned, has to distribute to other users the improvements the software
and its derivative works, if he chooses to distribute such improvements
or derivative works. In other words, software which incorporates
copyleft FOSS, must be distributed as copyleft FOSS. As a general
statement, it is not possible to incorporate copyright protected parts
of copyleft software in a proprietary licensed work.

Often Copyleft is referred to as “virality” of the license. However,
this wording has a pejorative implication and is misleading as to how
the copyleft principle operates. The copyleft clauses imposes a
condition as in: “if you want to do X, then you must do Y, else you
can’t do X”, but this concept has been mistaken for “if you do X, then
you are obligated to do Y, else I can force you to do Y”. In other
words, the result of distributing derivatives of copyleft software under
a different license is an infringement of the upstream license, it is
not that non properly licensed software is by magic transformed into
copyleft software. It does not cause per se any re-licensing of the
infringing work in copyleft software, unless the infringer wants to cure
the violation by relicensing. In other words, copyleft licenses are no
more “infective” than proprietary ones (in which, if the price is not
paid, the right to use the software is not obtained).

We have discussed above about the difference between the effects of an
obligation and of a condition in the section on enforcement and we make
reference to said discussion for further details.

#### Validity {#_validity_4}

The question of the validity of the copyleft clause coincides with the
question whether an author can effectively lay down how derivative works
have to be distributed. The answer to this question is affirmative. The
author of the original work has no rights in the derivative work as a
whole, but based on his rights in the original work he is able to permit
or prohibit the distribution of the derivative work. A derivative work
can therefore only be operated subject to the consent of the copyright
owner of the original work.

An issue could in theory be raised against creating exclusive rights
which are not provided by law, as copyleft is sometimes accused of
doing. But copyleft does not create any exclusive right that is not
already granted by the law: instead it carves its permissions out of the
already existing exclusive right to authorize derivative works. Since
the downstream recipient of the software must clear its derivatives vis
à vis all upstream copyrights, this either is done generally and
conditionally by using the copyleft license, or is done otherwise. If
and insofar as the conditions are approved — and met — the software is
clear. Otherwise the software is not clear and clearance must be sought
on an individual basis, as in any other kind of software distribution.
That, by the way, is how dual (proprietary + copyleft) licensing works,
such that Richard Stallman has dubbed the scheme as “sale of exceptions
\[to a copyright license\]”.[^342]

### Damages {#sec_italy_Damages}

According to Art. 158 of the Italian Copyright Law, damages caused by
copyright violations are compensated under Italian law in accordance
with the general legal principles applicable to unlawful acts (Art. 2056
and 2059 of the Italian Civil Code) and with the principles of breach of
contractual obligations (Art. 1223, 1224 and 1225 of the Italian Civil
Code). Those provisions establish that damages shall be awarded in a
measure sufficient to restore the economic (Art. 2056 ICC) and moral
(Art. 2059 ICC) losses of the aggrieved party. The economic loss is
calculated in terms of actual damage and lost profit, limited to the
damage that was foreseeable at the time of the breach unless the act was
done intentionally or due to gross negligence.

Dual damages, triple damages or other forms of punitive damages are not
awarded under Italian law. Traditionally, these damages were considered
radically incompatible with fundamental principles of Italian Law (so
called “divieto di locupletazione”). However, with the introduction of
TRIPS, a limited version of punitive damages (i.e. damages unrelated to
the actual loss suffered) has been introduced for patent and trademark
violations, under the name of “civil punishment” — such as awarding to
the rightholder the infringing products that have been confiscated.
Similarly, in copyright violations an award of damages not directly
related to the lost profits and the actual losses can easily be achieved
by applying moral damages (Art. 2059 of the Italian Civil Code,
expressly mentioned in Art. 158.3 of the Italian Copyright Law) and
through an award equal the profits unlawfully obtained as a result of
the violation by the violator (and profit here could include the
advantage coming from the avoidance of production costs). Infringements
of software copyrights follow the same regime as infringements of every
other copyright. The aforementioned principle is therefore applicable in
cases involving the infringement of software copyright. The same applies
to FOSS.

Infringements of software copyrights follow the same regime as
infringements of every other copyright. The aforementioned principle is
therefore applicable in case of copyright infringements of software.
Same applies to FOSS.

It may be assumed that the damage to the copyright owner will be in any
case very limited if existing, as the author has made his work freely
available. This argument is not necessarily bound to succeed, because
the factual premise falls flat in its face in many cases where FOSS
indeed is utilized for business purposes, as in the following cases.

Besides establishing a reputation and recognition — which can indeed be
a valuable asset — an author can have other reasons to make his or her
work “freely” available.[^343] The author may also gain a direct
monetary advantage from the free distribution of his work. The simplest
and traditiona way is to add advertisments to the software (“ad-ware”).
Another way is to offer specific services relating to the work, such as
assitance, maintenance, customization, indemnification, etc., or other
related products. In this later example, the free circulation of the
work ensures the work attracts many users. The author can generate his
income from the provision of support and consulting services, or by
licensing “proprietary add-ons”[^344] (roughly this is the “open core”
strategy). Another business model is the so-called dual licensing
model.[^345] This model uses — as the name suggests --- two different
licenses. The first license is often a strong copyleft license. This
first — free — license ensures the work is circulated quickly and
reaches a wide range of users. A second license without the copyleft
conditions can then be obtained for a licensing fee by those who want to
use the work in a wider application and at the same want to avoid that
their own additions or the overall product are affected by the copyleft
conditions, which is e.g. the case of proprietary applications using
FOSS libraries and components

However, there is no straightforward theory of damages for a FOSS
licensing violation. Arguably, if the program is dual-licensed, it would
be easy to establish the damage as the lost profits that the copyright
holder has suffered, which correspondis what the infringer ought to pay
to obtain a proprietary license. If the infringing party has obtained
licensing fees as a result of the infringement, again the damages could
be determined relatively easily by calculating the share of the profit
that has unfairly been generated as a result of the violation, using the
fiction established in Art. 158. If this does not apply, the judge can
refer to the costs unfairly avoided as a result of the violation (as if
the FOSS developer had worked for the infringer), or the cost of the
next most feasible proprietary alternative to the FOSS program — that
the infringer has avoided licensing thanks to the violation — can be
taken into consideration. This alternative can in fact be considered an
indication of the price that the infringer ought to have paid to obtain
a similar licensing from the FOSS developer at the same licensing
conditions (in other words, as if the product was dual licensed). The
problem with this latter approach is that in many cases the FOSS
developer is unwilling or unable to license the software on proprietary
terms. If he or she might issue a license, but refuses to do it on moral
or other grounds, one could argue that this *increases* the damage
instead of eliminating it, because the price to obtain this waiver to
copyleft could be immensely high if negotiated *ex ante*. If the license
is not possible (e.g., because of upstream constraints such as copyleft)
again this is no reason to negate the compensation, because obtaining to
an act of “violence” — the operative equivalent of a proprietary license
from somebody who arguably would not be willing to license the software
program on proprietary terms because moral motives — is a morally
challenging act that must be compensated with moral damages. Moral
damages can be awarded on an *ex bono et aequo* basis (Art. 2059, 2056
and 1226 ICC), which very frequently also takes into consideration the
profit gained by the violator.

### FOSS in the Public Administration {#_foss_in_the_public_administration}

While the private sector is more or less free to decide what kind of
software to adopt for their own use — there may be some restrictions
coming from certain law, like the need to fill tax returns using a
certain application, but this is seldom compelling — the public sector
is forced to follow strict rules in the procurement of software. This
goes beyond the rules imposed on public procurement procedures, aiming
at ensuring equal treatment to all competitors (“par condicio”), it
involves rules on *what kind* of software is to be procured.

The Code for the Digital Public Administration[^346] (“CAD”) has
provisions that dictate how the software for the public sector must be.
It says that it has to have certain characteristics, such as enabling
interoperability and services exchange. It also dictate which kind of
*licensing conditions* are to be explored and chosen after a comparision
through a formalized procedure (“Comparative analysis”). Art. 68.1
contains said list:

> -   Software made *ad hoc* for or by the concerned administration
>
> -   Reuse of software made *ad hoc* for other administration \[which
>     is compelled to license it for free, and to hand over also the
>     source code\][^347]
>
> -   Free and open source software \[FOSS\]
>
> -   Software obtained as a service (Cloud Computing)
>
> -   Software licensed under proprietary conditions
>
> -   Any combination of the above
>
Furthermore, Art. 68.1-ter provides that only when there is a motivated
impossibility to procure software under the conditions of reuse and/or
FOSS, then the public administration can redress to the acquisition of
software under proprietary conditions.[^348]. In other words, reuse and
FOSS *must be preferred* [^349] over proprietary software, even if on
pure technical and economic bases proprietary solutions score better.

FOSS cases in Italy {#sec_italy_FOSSCasesinItaly}
-------------------

No cases have been reported yet (November 2013).

Legal procedures {#sec_italy_Legalprocedures}
----------------

In Italy the nature of legal procedures in the field of copyright does
not not differ in nature from that in general civil cases, and a
procedure for temporary relief is also available. A copyright case is
heard by one of the 11 specialized sections for Industrial and
intellectual property Law. If a case falls within the jurisdiction of a
court that has no specialized sections, jurisdiction in the whole case
(even if it has other components which are not subject to this
specialized competence, e.g., the interpretation of an agreement) is
allocated to the court with the specialized section on a regional basis.
The court decides with a panel of three judges.

Some special investigative powers have been given to the courts, such as
ordering any involved third parties to provide information on the origin
of the goods and their chain of distribution.[^350] Also the possibility
of obtaining a description of the infringing goods in addition to their
seizure is noteworthy. A temporary or permanent enjoinder to distribute
the infringing works can be obtained. The decision may include an order
for publication in the press of its operative part at the expense of the
the infringing party.

The author of the work can always join the proceedings to protect his or
her own interests even if he or she has already disposed of the economic
rights in the work.

Recommended literature {#_recommended_literature_3}
----------------------

### Articles {#_articles_2}

-   FLOSS: gli indirizzi europei, la normativa italiana e le leggi
    regionali, Chapter 3 of the book “Finalmente libero! Software libero
    e standard aperti per le pubbliche amministrazioni” (2007,
    Mac Graw-Hill) edited by Michele Marchesi, Giulio Concas, Giulio De
    Petra, Flavia Marzano, Pietro Zanarini

-   Marco Bertani: Profili giuridici delle licenze di software libero /
    open source nell’ordinamento italiano, in “I quaderni di
    dirittodautore.it”, Anno III, n. 24,
    <http://www.dirittodautore.it/quaderni.asp?mode=3&IDQ=82>

-   Nerina Boschiero: Le licenze F/OSS nel diritto internazionale
    privato: il problema delle qualificazioni, in AIDA 2004
    (2005, Giuffrè)

-   Marco Ciurcina, Carlo Piana: Le licenze FLOSS: stato dell’arte ed
    evoluzioni, Chapter 11 of the book “Il software libero in Italia”
    (Shake, 2009) edited by Andrea Glorioso

-   Carlo Piana: Licenze pubbliche di software e contratto, in I
    contratti, n. 7/2006, IPSOA;
    <http://www.piana.eu/repository/720_727.pdf>

-   Marco Ricolfi: Software e limitazioni delle utilizzazioni del
    licenziatario, in AIDA 2004 (2005, Giuffrè)

-   Lele Rozza: Le principali iniziative legislative sul FLOSS, Chapter
    10 of the book “Il software libero in Italia” (Shake, 2009) edited
    by Andrea Glorioso

-   Marco Saverio Spolidoro: Open source e violazione delle sue regole,
    in AIDA 2004 (2005, Giuffrè)

-   Vincenzo Zeno-Zencovich, Pieremilio Sammarco: Sistema e archetipi
    delle licenze open source, in AIDA 2004 (2005, Giuffrè)

### Books {#_books_2}

-   Simone Aliprandi: Copyleft and Opencontent. L’altra faccia del
    copyright (2005, PrimaOra)

-   Simone Aliprandi: Apriti standard! Interoperabilità e formati aperti
    per l’innovazione tecnologica (2010, Ledizioni),
    <http://www.aliprandi.org/apriti-standard>

-   Aa.Vv.: Open Source. Atti del Convegno (Foggia, 2-3 luglio 2004)
    (2005, Giuffrè)

-   Giuseppe Sanseverino: Le licenze free e open source (2007, Edizioni
    Scientifiche Italiane)

Korea {#chap.korea}
=====

author:\[Park,Jongbaek\]

Body of Law {#_body_of_law_2}
-----------

Software, including computer programs, is protected as copyrightable
work under the Copyright Act (“the Act”) of Korea. Special provisions in
Articles 101-2 through 101-7 of the Act address the protection of such
programs. Previously, the Protection Act of Computer Programs addressed
the safeguarding of computer programs until it was abolished and
absorbed into the Act in 2009.[^351]

Under Korean law, international treaties, to which Korea is a party, are
self-executing, meaning that no additional legislation is necessary to
give effect to the treaty under domestic law. This means that
international treaties addressing copyrights or intellectual property
rights, such as the Berne Convention (effective in Korea as of 21 August
1996), the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights ("TRIPS") (effective in Korea as of 1 July 1996) and the World
Intellectual Property Organization Copyright Treaty ("WCT") (effective
in Korea as of 24 June 2004), are given the same weight and effect as
domestic law. As recently as 2012, Korea entered into Free Trade
Agreements (“FTA”) with the U.S. and the E.U., which have been in effect
since 15 March, 2012 and 1 July, 2011 respectively. The Act has been
revised to provide a wider range of protection for the software in
range, remedies, technical protection measures, etc.

Object of Protection {#_object_of_protection}
--------------------

According to the Act, ‘computer program’ means a work reduced to
writing, composed of orders and directions, used in a device with
information processing capability with the purpose of obtaining a
specific result.[^352] In other words, the program should 1) be
functioning on a device capable of processing, controlling, and storing,
2) be able to perform meaningful work, 3) have at least two sets of
instructions and orders, and 4) be expressed in code (and not just exist
as an idea).[^353] Under the laws of Korea, the term ‘software’ has a
broader meaning than just a computer program; it includes flow charts,
system architecture and user manuals, which are afforded legal
protection through the general provisions of the Act. Databases, while
not included in the definition of ‘computer program,’ are protected
separately under specific provisions contained in Articles 91 through
Article 98 of the Act. The Supreme Court of Korea has stated that to be
an author of a computer program, some level of creativity is required,
just as it is required for other literary works under the Act. It
declared that while the work does not need to be completely original or
novel, the author must have expressed his/her own thoughts or emotions
to the extent that his/her work is distinguishable from the work of
another.[^354] The Act, however, excludes programming languages
(characters, symbols and their systems as means of expressing programs),
syntax (special agreement on the usage of the programming language in a
specific program) and algorithms (combination methods of instructions
and commands in program) from protection.[^355]

Authors {#_authors}
-------

### Definition of Author {#_definition_of_author}

The general provisions of the Act applicable to authors of other type of
literary works extends to the authors of computer programs: an author is
a person who has created a work,[^356] and becomes the holder of
exclusive and moral rights to such work.[^357] Under the Berne
Convention, copyrights are composed of moral and exclusive rights. Moral
rights are the author’s right to have the work published, the right to
indicate his/her name on the work, and the right to preserve the
integrity of the content, format, and title of the work.An author
automatically becomes the copyright holder upon the creation of a work
since the Act does not require any registration procedures or other
types of formalities for an author to be recognized as a copyright
holder.[^358]

### Authors of Work Made for Hire {#_authors_of_work_made_for_hire}

In contrast, under the laws of Korea, an employer who engages an
employee for a work made for hire (sometimes referred to as work for
hire or WFH) will be treated as the author of the work, and not just the
holder of moral and exclusive rights.[^359] Here, an employer may refer
to a juristic person, legal entity, an organization, etc. [^360]

For a work to be recognized as a work made for hire, the following
conditions must be satisfied: a work has to be made (i) under the
supervision of an employer (ii) by an employee working for the employer
(iii) during performance of his or her duties, and (iv) the work must be
published under the name of the employer.[^361] In instances where
computer programs are work made for hire, employers do not need to meet
the fourth prong of the test as publication would be counter to the
purpose of keeping confidential trade secrets.[^362] However, even in
the case where all of the above conditions are satisfied, if an
employment contract or the employer’s internal regulation states
otherwise,[^363] the person who created the work may become the author
of the work.

In Korea, many programs used by companies are developed on a contract
basis[^364] meaning that a commissioning party can agree to pay
remuneration in exchange for work produced by a commissioned party (also
known as the developing party) to create certain programs. When the
conditions for work made for hire are not met in the course of
performance of the contract, the developing party, as the author, may
transfer exclusive rights to the party who ordered the work by an
agreement of assignment; however, the moral rights still belong to the
developing party as these rights are alienable from the author.
Therefore, it is important to analyze whether a commissioned work may be
recognized as a work made for hire as this determines the rightful
holder of moral rights. With regard to this issue, the courts have held
that the doctrine of work made for hire is usually not applicable to
most commissioned work. Generally, the commissioning party will not be
considered the author in a customary computer program development
contract. However, when the commission party is the sole investor,
planner, and publisher of the ordered work, and the commissioning party
borrows only the commissioned party’s human resources, the work will be
recognized as a work made for hire of the party who ordered the
work.[^365] In other words, in cases where the contribution of the
entity who ordered the work is dominant (while the developer has little
discretion), the ordering entity is the sole financer of the program,
and the work is developed to benefit only the commissioning party, the
program will be recognized as a work made for hire, as described in the
above.

### Joint Authors {#_joint_authors_2}

In case of a joint authorship, an author may not exercise the exclusive
or moral rights without the unanimous agreement of all the copyright
holders. However, a copyright holder may not discourage the other
copyright holders from reaching an agreement on exercise of the
copyright or unreasonably withhold his/her consent in bad faith.[^366]
Authors of a joint work may designate a representative amongst them to
exercise their copyrights, with the caveat that any limitations imposed
on the authority of such representative should not take precedence over
a bona fide third party.[^367] With respect to the exclusive rights of a
joint authorship, an author cannot transfer, assign or pledge his/her
share of the exclusive rights without the consent of the remaining
authors. Any profit accruing from the exploitation of a joint work will
be apportioned among the authors according to the respective shares of
each author, unless otherwise stipulated. In such cases, the share of
each author shall be deemed equal unless otherwise clearly
specified.[^368]

Exclusive rights {#_exclusive_rights}
----------------

According to the Act, the author of a program has exclusive rights to
reproduce,[^369] transmit or broadcast the work in public,[^370] and to
distribute,[^371] lease, rent,[^372] or produce derivative works[^373].
Characteristics worth noting are as follows. Based on the revision of
the Act in 2011, which reflected the Korea-United States FTA, temporary
reproduction was included in concept of a reproduction. The right of
public transmission, which includes the pre-existing notion of rights of
broadcasting and transferring, was introduced by the amendment of the
Act in 2006. It was through this amendment that the Act was extended to
include the right of transmission of a work or database or right of
making such work or database available to the public via wire or
wireless communication. As a result, uploading digital information of a
work on the internet is now prohibited as a violation of right of public
transmission. The right of distribution is only applicable to
distribution in tangible media. The Court has declared that ‘a user’s
connecting to a certain server to save a specific digital file in a
shared folder to enable other users to download shall not be considered
a distribution and that transferring a work or a copy only in a tangible
media shall be construed as distribution.[^374] The author’s leasing
rights only applies when a computer program is leased for profit; the
right to create derivative works means a right to create a new work
based on the work by means of translation, modification, alteration,
etc. of original work; and the right to make compilations falls under
the right of reproduction.[^375]

Exceptions to the Exclusive Rights {#_exceptions_to_the_exclusive_rights}
----------------------------------

In relation to use of computer programs, there are several special
exceptions to exclusive rights under the Act. For example, a user of a
computer program may temporarily reproduce such program in a computer
without consent of the exclusive right holder to the extent deemed
necessary for the purpose of efficient information processing.[^376]
Additionally, a user may reproduce a program to check the ideas or
principles underlying such program for the purpose of research, study,
or testing without the consent of the copyright holder and may
temporarily reproduce a program for the purpose of maintenance and
repair of such program. [^377] Reverse engineering is the copying or
modifying of a computer program copyright code in order to obtain
information necessary for interoperability of independently created
computer programs with other computer programs.[^378] The Act allows
limited reverse engineering in cases where it is necessary to obtain
information for the compatibility of such program with other program,
provided that a user cannot obtain said information through an
alternative source or method. A user may not transmit information
obtained by reverse engineering to a third party other than for the
purpose of establishing or testing compatibility. Furthermore, the user
should not use the information obtained during reverse engineering for
developing, producing, or selling substantially similar programs in
infringement of the copyright of the program.[^379] In regard to the
principle of exhaustion, once the original work or its copy has been
sold with the copyright holder’s express intention to do so, (excluding
the holder of moral right, since the moral right is inalienable while
exclusive right is not), the right of distribution by the copyright
holder is exhausted.[^380] Therefore, a buyer may distribute the
original work or its copy without any permission from the holder of
exclusive right. However, it is not clear under the laws of Korea
whether the principle of exhaustion applies to intangible digital works
purchased through on-line networks as there are no current statutes or
court precedents that address this issue.

Moral Rights {#_moral_rights_3}
------------

An author’s moral rights belong exclusively to the author,[^381] and
these rights cannot be assigned or transferred. Moral rights are the
author’s right to publish the work, the right of attribution, and the
right to preserve the integrity of the content, format, and title of the
work. Exercising such rights through a proxy or an agent is possible,
but only to the extent that it does not substantially infringe upon the
author’s moral rights.[^382] A person who violates an author’s moral
rights will be subject to imprisonment for no more than three years or
be charged with a fine not exceeding 30 million won, or both.[^383]
Expression of an author’s intention on his or her right to the integrity
of the work may be delivered by implied consent.[^384] A user may modify
a computer program without consent of the copyright holder, only to the
extent such modification is necessary to make the program which is
designed for a specific computer available for other computers or to the
extent such modification is necessary for efficiency of the specific
computer.[^385] The right of attribution and the right of publication is
governed by the general provisions of the Act. In cases where authors
and copyright holders of unpublished work are not one in the same, and
these authors, rather than the copyright holders, assign their exclusive
rights to another person or grant the person the right to use or
exclusively issue it, the authors will be deemed to have consented to
its publication.[^386] If derivative or compilation work made with the
consent of the original author has been published, the original work
will be deemed to have been published.[^387]

Terms of Protection {#_terms_of_protection}
-------------------

The 2011 amended version of the Act, effective as of 1 July 2013,
provides that the author’s exclusive rights to a program will be
effective for the author’s life time plus seventy years after the death
of the author.[^388] The exclusive rights for work made for hire
continues to exist for a period of 70 years after it has been
published.[^389] The exclusive rights for a work with no author’s name
or second name continues to exist for a period of 70 years after it has
been published.[^390] The exclusive rights to a joint work continues to
exist for a period of seventy years after the death of the last
surviving author,[^391] and the exclusive right for derivative works is
protected independently from the original work, under the Act, for the
lifetime of the author of derivative works plus seventy years after the
death of such author. The protection period of the exclusive rights
starts from the year after the author’s death or its publication,[^392]
since it may be difficult ascertain the exact dates of the author’s
death, creation or publication.

Copyright Assignment {#_copyright_assignment_3}
--------------------

### Assignment of Exclusive Rights {#_assignment_of_exclusive_rights}

Exclusive rights may be assigned in whole or in part.[^393] Each of the
exclusive rights, such as right of reproduction, right of public
transmission, etc., may be assigned as a whole or in piecemeal.
Additional constraints such as geographic limitations may be added. For
example, the right of reproduction may only be available in the U.S.
When the exclusive rights of a program are assigned as a whole, the
right to make a derivative work will be presumed to have been included,
unless otherwise stipulated.[^394] The exclusive right holder may grant
permission to use the work instead of transferring the exclusive right
by assignment.[^395] When it is uncertain whether the author assigned
the exclusive rights or granted mere permission to use, the exclusive
rights will remain with the author, according to the Supreme Court’s
decision.[^396] According to Article 105 (1) of the Act, copyrights can
be held in trust. Under the Trust Act, if the trustor creates a valid
express trust, the trustee should manage and dispose of the trust corpus
in the interest of the beneficiary or in the stated interests of the
trust. Under the trust agreement, ownership of the trust property is
completely transferred from the trustor to the trustee; and the trustee
has all of the rights to the trust property, including the right to file
a lawsuit. Therefore, the trustor is prohibited from instituting any
claims for compensatory damages based on the copyrights in the trust
property.[^397] Under Article 105(2) of the Act only those organizations
satisfying the following criteria are permitted to carry out copyright
trust services: (i) the organization must be comprised of holders of
copyrights (or other rights protected under the Copyright Act) to the
trust property; (ii) the organization must be not for profit; and (iii)
the organization must possess the capability to conduct the collection
and distribution of royalties.

### Assignment of Moral Rights {#_assignment_of_moral_rights}

Since the author’s moral rights are inalienable and not
transferable,[^398] moral rights exhaust at the author’s death. No
special provisions under the Act limit the moral rights of computer
programs, as such, moral rights for computer programs are recognized
like other copyrighted works. Due to its inalienability, an author’s
moral rights cannot be held in trust.[^399]

Special Measures {#_special_measures_4}
----------------

### Civil Remedies {#_civil_remedies}

If a copyright holder’s work is infringed, the copyright holder may file
an application for a cease-and-desist order against the infringer. The
copyright holder or holder of other rights under the Act may request an
injunction for such infringement provided that such infringement
continues, regardless of the infringer’s intention or negligent
conduct.[^400] The copyright holder may file a petition to a court to
take preventive measures or to provide a security for compensation for
damages against a potential infringer of his or her exclusive rights.
The court may issue a preliminary injunction to temporarily suspend the
infringement, to seize the objects made by the act of infringement, or
to take other necessary measures on behalf of the plaintiff whose
copyright is being infringed.[^401] The copyright holder' may also seek
injunctive relief, which may be granted upon showing the existence of
the claims to be preserved and the need to preserve such claims. The
copyright holder’s right to apply for a cease-and-desist order and right
to request preventive measures constitute the existence of such claims.
A pledge of security may not be required to grant injunctive
relief.[^402]. Moreover, the copyright holder has the right to request
actual damages for monetary loss or non-economic damages, such as mental
or emotional damage, against the infringer.[^403] The copyright holder
may claim, taking into account the difficulty of proving the amount of
damages, either (1) the amount of profit the infringer gained through
infringement, or (2) the amount corresponding to the revenues that would
have been acquired by the copyright holder by exercising his or her
copyright in normal course of business.[^404] Moreover, due to revision
of the Act to reflect the Korea-US FTA, the copyright holder may claim
statutory damages, instead of actual damages, if the copyright holder
had registered his/her copyright prior to exercise of the claim of
statutory damages.[^405] In case the copyright holder fails to prove the
infringer’s intentional conduct or negligence or the three year period
for statute of limitations has expired, the copyright holder may claim
restitution for unjust enrichment pursuant to the Civil Act of Korea.
When an author’s moral rights (such as the right to decide when and how
to publish a work—which may be done anonymously or pseudonymously—the
right of attribution, or right to the integrity of the work) are
infringed, the author may claim damages arising from such infringements
under Article 751 of the Civil Act of Korea. The court has declared that
“although no express law exists, it is natural that copyright holder can
claim damages for the infringement of his or her moral right which is
inalienable in its nature.[^406]" In these situations, there is a
rebuttable presumption that the copyright holder suffered damages,
mentally or emotionally, as well as damages to reputation.[^407] The
copyright holder may request to take measures to restore his/her
reputation in cases of defamation. In the event the moral rights are
infringed or the dignity of the author has been damaged, the damaged
party may request restoration of his or her reputation as well as
monetary damages.[^408] The Act also has separate provisions that apply
to the infringement of moral rights after an author’s death. This
provision allows the author’s bereaved family or executor of his or her
will to demand preventive measures, provision of security for damages,
or restoration of the author’s reputation.[^409]

### Joint Works {#_joint_works}

In the event there are concerns that the copyright of a joint work might
be infringed, each joint author is entitled to seek preventive measures
or a cease-and-desist order under Article 123 of the Act. If the
exclusive rights are infringed, each of the holders of exclusive rights
may claim monetary damages in proportion to his or her share of
copyright under Article 125 of the Act. When the infringement of moral
rights concerns all the joint authors, the copyright holders must act in
unison to seek reparation. However, the amount of damages sought by each
author is in his/her discretion.[^410] In cases where moral rights of
just one of the joint authors are infringed, each author may act
independently of the others when filing suit.

### Collective Works {#_collective_works_2}

When there are concerns as to whether copyrights of collective works
will be infringed or when copyrights of collective works are actually
infringed, each copyright holder may respectively claim damages or seek
prohibitive and preventive measures, or cease-and-desist orders for the
works created by him or herself.

### Derivative Works {#_derivative_works_2}

The courts[^411] have held that the copyright of derivative computer
program belongs to the author of the derivative computer program
regardless of whether the copyright holder of the original work gave
his/her consent for use of the original in the derivative work. The
author of the derivative work may claim damages when the derivative
work’s copyright is infringed. However, a copyright holder of a
derivative work may not use the derivative work without consent of the
copyright holder of the original work.

### Criminal Sanctions {#_criminal_sanctions}

Article 136 of the Act stipulates that copyright infringers are subject
to criminal punishment. Before the inclusion of the Korea-USA FTA into
the Act, Article 140 provided that a copyright infringer may not be
criminally punished without a complaint by the copyright holder except
in circumstances where infringements were committed habitually *and*
with profit-making motives (*emphasis added*). With the passage of the
Korea-USA FTA, the Act’s exception clause was broadened to allow
criminal prosecution of those who were habitual infringers *or*
infringers who were profit-motivated ('emphasis added").[^412] It is
possible that this broadened exception clause subjects more infringers
to criminal sanctions as compared to the previous version of the Act.

Unprotected Software and Public Domain Software {#_unprotected_software_and_public_domain_software}
-----------------------------------------------

Works with expired copyright protection terms, works without a copyright
holder, or works with express waivers from copyright holder are not be
protected under the Act. In contrast, though Free and Open Source
Software (“FOSS”) makes available its source code for public use, it is
not unprotected software or public domain software as defined under the
Act.

Analysis of FOSS under Korean Law {#_analysis_of_foss_under_korean_law}
---------------------------------

### Copyright {#_copyright_2}

The process of concluding FOSS licenses differs from that of other
copyrighted works. Under Korean law, a FOSS license agreement is treated
much like a contract because of the similarities between the two. First,
the all-important intent to form a contract exists between the two
parties. The offeror intends the offeree to use the copyrighted work by
granting the offeree the permission to use the work; the offeree often
manifests his/her intent to accept through some action that signifies
his/her acceptance. Second, a FOSS license explicitly states the
material conditions for using the copyrighted work. For the reasons
mentioned above, the FOSS license agreement is binding and enforceable
under Korean law as a contract. Although people might have the mistaken
belief that authors of FOSS have waived their rights because of the free
public availability of FOSS, from the legal perspective, the authors
continue to hold their valid copyrights in FOSS, which are protected
under the relevant laws while simultaneously allowing users the right to
use the FOSS under certain conditions. The development environment of
FOSS is radically different than the environment in which commercial
proprietary software is developed. While several program developers may
collaborate at the same time to create the first version of FOSS, FOSS
is usually developed by successive combinations of derivative works
taken from preceding derivative works based on its original work.
Important legal issues concerning FOSS are: who holds the copyrights,
what is the object of copyright protection, and how copyright holders
can enforce their rights emanating from the copyrights. All of which are
reviewed in detail as follows:

### Qualification of FOSS {#_qualification_of_foss_5}

Many users are expected to use, copy, modify, and redistribute FOSS
after the creation of the first version. The works made during the
process are classified into one of three categories: joint works,
collective works, or derivative works. Joint work is created when two or
more program developers collaborate, with the intention that their
individual contributions be merged into one. Program developers need not
work on the program contemporaneously in order to be considered joint
work. Collective work is when each developer’s contribution can be used
separately and independently. Derivative work is when a developer
modifies the pre-existing FOSS with significant variations while
maintaining substantial similarities.[^413]

### Rights of Joint Authors {#_rights_of_joint_authors}

Since the exclusive rights to a joint work must be exercised with the
unanimous agreement of all the exclusive rights holders, it becomes more
significantly harder to reach absolute consensus when many developers
are involved. To solve this conundrum, copyleft FOSS licenses contain
clauses that make it mandatory for each contributor (developer) to allow
his or her contribution to be freely available to the public for copy,
modification and redistribution. Moreover, in accordance with the
principle of private autonomy, each contributor may agree in advance to
make freely available his/her contribution even before he/she creates
the code in accordance with the license agreement, which shall be
effective under the laws of Korea.

### Rights of Authors of Collective Works {#_rights_of_authors_of_collective_works}

The defining characteristic of a collective work is that each author’s
contribution can be separated into discrete parts. As such, each author
of a collective work may, without the other authors’ permission, assign
his or her exclusive rights to another or permit others to use his/her
own creation.

### Rights of Copyright Holders of Derivative Works {#_rights_of_copyright_holders_of_derivative_works}

The Korean Supreme Court held that creator of the derivative work of a
computer program holds the copyrights to the derivative work, whether or
not the copyright holder of the original work gave his/her consent to
use the original work in the derivative one.[^414] Therefore, copyrights
for the derived programs based on General Public Licensed ("GPL’d")
software belong to the developer of the derivative work, to the extent
that it is his/her own creation under the laws of Korea.[^415] When an
original work and its derivative are inseparable, a question arises of
whether the consent of all authors is needed in order to modify or
change the inseparable work. To deal with this issue, Article 6 of
General Public License ("GPL") 2.0 states that recipients of each
derivative work automatically receive a license from the original
licensor to use, copy, distribute or modify such derivative work. Also,
Article 2 of Apache 2.0 and Article 2.1 of the Mozilla Public License
(“MPL”) 2.0 state that each contributor gives users permission to use
the work. All of the previously cited license clauses are valid under
Korean law. Copyleft clauses in FOSS licenses may be a point of
controversy when it comes to protecting derivative works or authors of
derivative works under Korean law. Copyleft clauses obligate the source
code of derivative works to be distributed under the same license as the
original work, which results in limiting the exercise of the copyright
by the copyright holder of the derivative works. However, under Apache
and Berkeley Software Distribution (“BSD”) licenses, which do not
require the authors of the derivative works to disclose the source code
of the modified programs, the copyrights of the authors of the
derivative works are protected as provided in the Act. Since Korean law
acknowledges the principle of private autonomy, except for certain
rights that cannot be transferred or waived under the compulsory
provisions, exercise of copyrights can be limited in accordance with a
license agreement under the doctrine. For example, copyleft clauses may
limit the moral right of a copyright holder of a derivative work by
stipulating the method and time of publication of the work or by
allowing free modification of the work by the public. However, an author
is entitled to determine how to exercise his/her moral rights under the
principle of private autonomy as long as he/she does not transfer
his/her moral rights. Therefore, copyleft clauses are valid under Korean
law if it falls within the previously described bounds of conduct. If an
author of the derivative work does not fulfill his or her obligations
under the license and argues that the copyleft clause is unfair and thus
void under the Korean law, GPL auto-termination clauses may intervene by
prohibiting the author of the derivative work from using the original
work. While it’s undecided if this would be a winning argument in court,
the author of a derivative work most likely will not benefit from
arguing that copyleft clauses are void.

### The Assignment of Copyrights {#_the_assignment_of_copyrights_4}

The same principle on the assignment of copyrights applies to computer
programs. Copyrights of software can also be held in trust; however, it
is not frequently practiced in Korea. When FOSS is made as a work for
hire, the employer becomes the author of the FOSS by operation of the
Act and thus becomes the holder of exclusive and moral rights.[^416] In
such instances, the employer may exercise its copyrights under the terms
and conditions of a FOSS license.

Moral Rights {#_moral_rights_4}
------------

Because most FOSS licenses allow liberal modifications to FOSS, a major
legal issue is whether these modifications will severely infringe upon
the author’s right to the integrity of the work. Creating a derivative
work inevitably causes limitations on the exercise of the original
author’s right to the integrity of the work since the derivative work is
a new one that substantially modifies the original work. However, the
author’s right to the integrity of the work can also be waived under the
doctrine of private autonomy. When a copyright holder allows its
downstream users to create derivative works, the copyright holder may
dictate the parameters within which the integrity of the content should
be maintained. Therefore, by executing a license agreement, the original
author may limit his or her moral right to maintain the integrity of the
work by allowing free and substantial modifications of the original work
without running afoul Korean law. There is a caveat to the original
author’s waiver of the right: when a user of FOSS modifies the original
work in a manner against the original author’s purpose of creation,
which renders the author’s intention suspicious, and is detrimental to
the honor or reputation of the original author, infringement of the
author’s moral rights shall still be recognized, regardless of the
effectiveness of the original author’s waiver of the right to the
integrity of the work under the terms of a license.

Enforcing FOSS Licenses {#_enforcing_foss_licenses_4}
-----------------------

Various bodies of law such as Korean contract law, the Copyright Act,
criminal law, etc. should be considered simultaneously in order to
determine whether FOSS license agreements are binding and enforceable.

### Contracting Parties {#_contracting_parties_2}

Unlike general license agreements, FOSS license agreements may involve
several authors of the original work or derivative works. Assuming that
an agreement is concluded, once FOSS is downloaded and used, identifying
the contracting parties is an issue. In order to legitimately use FOSS
as an end user at the end of development chain, the end user must
receive permission from all legitimate copyright holders throughout the
entire development and modification process of FOSS. When FOSS is
distributed directly from the copyright holder of the original FOSS (the
“Original Copyright Holder”), the contracting parties of the FOSS
license agreement are the Original Copyright Holder and the recipient of
the software. However, if the recipient of FOSS redistributes the
software to a third party (the “Redistributor”) without making any
modifications, different opinions may arise on whether the Redistributor
becomes either a contracting party or an agent of the Original Copyright
Holder who is the contracting party. It is reasonable to recognize that
the intent of the distributor is to distribute the software in his or
her own capacity within the scope of his or her permitted use, instead
of distributing as the copyright holder’s agent, unless it was
explicitly otherwise expressed. For example, when a distributor of
non-copyleft licensed original software distributes that software under
a different license, the effect of the distribution is not binding on
the author of FOSS because he/she never agreed to the different license.
Therefore, the contracting parties of such distribution should be the
distributor and the downstream recipient.[^417] Naturally, when a person
who modified a program distributes the modified software, he/she would
be the contracting party.[^418]

### The Validity of FOSS Licenses {#_the_validity_of_foss_licenses}

#### Contractual Relationship {#_contractual_relationship}

Providing FOSS for free gives it the simultaneous status as a gift under
the Korean Civil Act as well as a copyrightable work license agreement
under the Act.[^419] An offer and acceptance are required to form a
legally binding contract. Under the current legal framework, the
distribution of FOSS constitutes an offer.[^420] Though the licensees
may be numerous and unspecified, FOSS license agreements may be
considered contracts as long as they contain material terms that are
specific and definitive. The Court has held that ‘offer should be
specific and definitive to such an extent as to establish an agreement
by its corresponding acceptance; the offer should include information
which could determine the contents of the agreement.’[^421] Most FOSS
licenses present specific and definitive terms and conditions which
could determine the contents of the agreement in order to use the
corresponding FOSS program. In order for a contract to come into
existence, an offer and its corresponding acceptance should be present,
and, in principle, the offeree should notify the offerror of his/her
acceptance. Practically speaking, no means exist for a licensee of FOSS
to notify anyone of his/her acceptance. Where no notice of acceptance is
required for a contract to be validly executed, whether through the
offeror’s explicit permission or because of trade custom practice, the
contract will come into existence upon the occurrence of an event, which
may be construed as a declaration of the intention to accept.[^422]
Under a FOSS license agreement, the licensee does not need to give a
notice of acceptance to the licensor. Instead, the licensee’s download
of FOSS[^423] or the modification or distribution of the program
constitutes acceptance[^424]. Experts are divided as to which of these
events actually qualify as the formal acceptance. Further, FOSS licenses
are regarded as standardized contract terms as defined under the Act on
the Regulation of Terms and Conditions. Standardized contract terms
means the contents of a contract that a party prepares in a specific
form in advance in order to enter into a contract with unspecified
multiple parties regardless of their name, type, or scope.[^425]

### No Warranty {#_no_warranty}

#### Limitation on ‘no warranty clause’ under the Civil Act {#_limitation_on_no_warranty_clause_under_the_civil_act}

License agreements such as GPL, etc. provide that any copyright holder,
or any other party who may modify or redistribute the program
(“Contributors”) may disclaim warranties against any defects of the FOSS
program. In other words, Contributors are not liable for any damages
arising out of defects of the program, even if the holder or other party
was aware that the defects may have existed. According to Article 559 of
the Korean Civil Act, \`a donor shall not be liable for any defect or
deficiency in the thing or right which forms the subject of his or her
gift; provided, that this shall not apply to cases where he/she was
aware of such defect or deficiency and has nevertheless failed to inform
the donee thereof.’ The aforementioned article on the Korean Civil Act
seems to conflict with the FOSS license no-warranties clauses. However,
the terms of no-warranty clauses of FOSS license agreement such as GPL,
which includes ‘possibility of such defects,’ does not extend to cases
where copyright holder are fully aware of the defects. In other words,
when the copyright does not disclose a known defect or deficiency to a
recipient, the copyright holder will be liable for damages under the
Korean Civil Act. No-warranty clauses will be ineffective in these
situations. However, when the copyright holders only recognize the
possibility of defects, without actual knowledge of such defect or
deficiency, which is threshold conditions under the Korean Civil Act,
the copyright holders can effectively disclaim its warranties.[^426]

#### Under the Act on the Regulation of Standardized Contracts {#_under_the_act_on_the_regulation_of_standardized_contracts}

According to Article 7 of the Act on the Regulation of Standardized
Contracts,[^427] the standardized contract terms that concern the
liability of contracting parties that fall under any of the following
subparagraphs will be null and void: 1) a clause that exempts a business
operator (a party to a contract who offers standard business terms to
the opposing parties as the content of the contract), its agents, or its
employees from liability arising from intentional conduct or gross
negligence; 2) a clause which limits the extent of damages payable by
the business operator, in circumstances without objective justifiable
cause; 3) a clause which excludes or limits the warranty liability of a
company in situations without objective justifiable cause.[^428] The
no-warranty clauses of the FOSS license agreements as in GPL, constitute
standard business terms since a contracting party prepares such clauses
in a specific form in advance in order to enter into a contract with
unspecified multiple contracting parties. Since FOSS is provided for
free, which could be seen as an “objective justifiable cause” under
subparagraphs 2) and 3), a no- warranty clause would apply and thus
would not be null and void. However, in the event that disclaimer
clauses are applied to software providers who acted with intention or
gross negligence, the clause would be null and void under the above
referenced paragraph 1). In other words, if the licensor was aware of
the defect of the software or should have been aware of the defect but
for the gross negligence of the licensor, the licensor is liable for
damages pursuant to Article 559 of the Korean Civil Act. If the
licensor’s gross negligence or intentional conduct is proven, the
licensee is entitled to seek liabilities from the licensor pursuant to
Article 7 of the Act on the Regulation of Terms and Conditions.[^429]
However, if the licensee under the GPL 2.0 seeks liabilities from the
licensor claiming that the no-warranty clause is null and void, then the
licensor may claim that the license agreement was automatically
terminated because the licensee copied or distributed FOSS program
except as expressly provided under GPL 2.0 and was in breach of a
no-warranty clause. When a commercial distributor provides warranties
for a FOSS in exchange for a fee, no warranties in the original FOSS
license agreement will be deemed to have been modified between the
commercial distributor and the end user, especially when these
warranties did not exist in the original license agreement. Therefore,
the distributor should be liable under the additional contractual
obligations as a contracting party. Moreover, to the extent the scope of
warranty under such agreement is narrower than the scope specified in
the compulsory provisions of relevant laws, the warranties scope
specified in the applicable law will apply.

#### Limitation under the Product Liability Act {#_limitation_under_the_product_liability_act}

Under the Korea Product Liability Act, ‘product’ means all movable
goods, industrially manufactured or processed, including movable goods
that is a part of another immovable or movable good. Because of the
perceived intangible nature of a computer program, whether a ‘computer
program’ is a product is a hotly contested issue.[^430] According to
Article 3 of the Korea Product Liability Act, a manufacturer who
distributes software contained or embedded in tangible storage means or
devices will be liable for damages, death, personal injuries, or
property damage (this category excludes the damage to the defective
product) that a person suffers as a result of a product defect, arising
from defects in manufacturing, defects of design, or inadequate warnings
on the product.[^431] Any special agreement intended to exclude or limit
the liabilities for damage in violation of the Product Liability Act
will be null and void, provided that this will not apply to cases where
a person who purchased a defective product to be used solely for his/her
own business and entered into a special agreement to limit or exclude
liabilities for damages incurred to his business property.[^432] In
order to apply the Product Liability Act to a FOSS distributor, the
distributor should be a manufacturer, which the Product Liability Act
defines as a person who is engaged in the business of manufacturing,
processing, or importing any product.[^433] If a company creates a FOSS
program embedded in a device or devices meant for its own consumption,
the liability exemption clause of the FOSS license may be valid under
Article 6 of the Act. Therefore, in practice, product liability on FOSS
would not often recognized.[^434]

The Copyleft Principle {#_the_copyleft_principle_3}
----------------------

### Principle {#_principle_5}

Strong copyleft clauses included in GPL 2.0 or 3.0, which obligate
downstream users to distribute the source code of work based on the
original program of the same copyleft license, may conflict with the
Copyright Act and the Trade Secret Protection Act. The former
acknowledges the independent copyrights of authors of derivative works
while the latter protects trade secrets.

### The Validity of Copyleft Clause {#_the_validity_of_copyleft_clause}

As mentioned above, copyleft clauses are valid under Korean law since
the principle of private autonomy is applied to the exercise of
copyright. However, copyleft clauses may conflict with the Trade Secret
Protection Act. The Trade Secret Protection Act defines ‘trade secret’
as information (including production and sales methods, useful technical
or business information for business activity), that is not publicly
known and of which is the subject of considerable effort to maintain the
secrecy and independent economic value. Though trade secrets are
protected under the Trade Secret Protection Act, many licenses,
including GPL, require disclosure of the original source code for
derivative programs and thus may be in conflict with the Trade Secret
Protection Act.. The Korean Supreme Court has held that when the person
who modifies FOSS becomes the author of the derivative work by meeting
the legal standard set forth by the courts, the original source code of
the derivative work is still considered a trade secret provided that it
remains unpublished, retains its independent economic value, and is kept
confidential through the considerable effort of the trade secret holder.
Although the author of derivative work may be liable for damages to the
original author because the author of the derivative work failed to meet
his/her duty to disclose the source code, more likely, the author of the
derivative work will not have to disclose the source code since it i) is
not known publicly, and ii) is the subject of considerable effort to
maintain its secrecy, and iii) has independent economic value, and
therefore is qualified as a trade secret.[^435] This holding is to be
criticized as described in the section entitled “FOSS Cases in Korea.”

Remedies for Infringement {#_remedies_for_infringement}
-------------------------

### Under the Copyright Act {#_under_the_copyright_act}

The principles that apply to other copyrightable works apply to FOSS
when authors claim remedies and criminal sanctions under the Act.
Standing to sue differs depending on whether the work is a joint work, a
collective work, or a derivative work as described in the section
entitled “Analysis of FOSS under Korean Law.”[^436]

### Breach of License Agreement or Copyright Infringement, Compensation for Damages {#_breach_of_license_agreement_or_copyright_infringement_compensation_for_damages}

When there is a breach of a FOSS agreement, a determination must be made
of if the breach constitutes a breach of contract and further a
copyright infringement. If the breach corresponds to exclusive rights,
which are guaranteed under the Act, the breach may be treated as a
copyright infringement. Because there are no court precedents that deal
with this issue head-on, the herculean task of making such
determinations is set before the Korean judiciary. While it is by no
means a complete guide to the subject, there is a case that may shed
some light on this particular issue. In the case where an author of a
derivative work based on GPL’d FOSS failed his duty to disclose its
source code, the Supreme Court did not clarify whether such was a breach
of a contract or constituted an infringement of copyrights. The lack of
clarity came from the Supreme Court’s usage of the phrases “violation of
the GPL agreement” and “the copyright holder” in its decision. The Court
pointed out that such decisions are held separately from the issue of
whether the author of derivative work who violates the GPL agreement may
be liable for damages to the copyright holder of the original work.
However, the lower court made it clear that the author of a derivative
work who used a GPL’d FOSS, without disclosing the source code, is in
violation of the GPL and is liable for damages to the copyright holder
of the original work for copyright infringement.[^437] The details of
the case are to be discussed in the following section. To determine the
proper cause of action under which compensation for breach of a license
agreement is sought, the form of the infringement and the nature of the
infringed rights should be analyzed. If the object of the infringement
is a component of the copyrights as defined under the Act, the Act is
applicable and the special measures as stated in Part I will apply. On
the other hand, when the object of infringement is a contractual license
obligation, which is not fulfilled, contract law under the Korean Civil
Act would apply. If a licensee breaches a FOSS license agreement, the
licensor may apply for specific performance[^438] or terminate the
license agreement[^439] upon occurrence of a termination event or upon
expiry of period of notification for performance as provided under FOSS
license[^440] or claim damages.[^441] The licensor may file under the
Civil Execution Act, with a provisional disposition to keep the licensee
from using the FOSS program or to disclose its source code until the
relevant judgment is held.

FOSS Cases in Korea {#_foss_cases_in_korea}
-------------------

### Elimnet v. Haionnet {#_elimnet_v_haionnet}

An employee of Elimnet (the Developer) created a derivative work using
GPL’d FOSS during his employment and assigned the copyright to the
company. Elimnet used the derivative work for its business. After a
while, the Developer resigned from Elimnet without disclosing the source
code of the derivative work to company. He later founded Haionnet and
used the modified version of the derivative work for its Haionnet’s
business. Elimnet filed a complaint arguing that the Developer used
Elimnet’s trade secrets without permission. The Developer was charged
with the violation of the Trade Secret Protection Act. The Supreme Court
held that in view of the assignment contract of the copyright between
Elimnet and the Developer, Elimnet was the copyright holder of the
derivative work based on the GPL’d software; the same court did not
address whether Elimnet should be liable for damages to the copyright
holder of the original GPL’d software. The court further held that the
source code of the derivative work was Elimnet’s trade secret since the
source code of the derivative work i) was not known publicly, ii) had
independent economic value and iii) was maintained as a secret through
considerable effort. However, a strict application of the court’s
decision in this case can be criticized as below. The purpose of
protecting trade secret is to prevent infringers from gaining unjust
profit through unfair competition, rather than to protect trade secret
itself.[^442] The copyright holder of the original work allowed users to
modify the work under the condition that users disclose the source code
of the modified program to the public, along wide public access to the
modified program. A refusal by either a user or developer to fulfill
his/her obligations would lead to the automatic termination of the
license. The lower court held that refusing to disclose the source code
of the modified program would be an infringement of the original
copyright holder’s right of modification: the act of using the modified
program without disclosing its source code would be an infringement of
the copyrights of the original author because it exploited the
creativity of the original author without his/her permission.[^443] It
is in doubt whether the derivative author of a GPL’d software who has
violated the terms of the license agreement can be regarded as a fair
competitor who should be protected under the Trade Secret Protection
Act. Moreover, the information must be maintained in confidence to be
recognized as a trade secret. Secrecy is maintained only when it is kept
in confidence by the legitimate holder, who holds the lawful right to
use the trade secret.[^444] The modifier holds the copyright of the
derivative work, but does not hold the copyright for the original work.
Because the derivative work is in generally inseparable from the
original software, the modifier inevitably infringes the copyright of
the original program whenever he/she uses the derivative work without
permission of the original author. Therefore, in such circumstances, the
derivative author may not necessarily be regarded as a holder of a
lawful right to use the derivative work or a derivative author who
should be protected under the Criminal Act. Protecting a company’s
derivative work as a trade secret when it was created by infringing the
copyright holder‘s original work does not conform to the purpose of the
Trade Secret Act. Moreover, as previously discussed, since the source
code of the derivative work may not satisfy the conditions of a trade
secret, the court’s holding that acknowledged the derivative work, an
undisclosed source code of FOSS, as a trade secret may be criticized.
Such a court holding does not conform to the original copyright holder’s
intent to make the software as free and open as possible, which might
hinder the active use and development of FOSS in Korea.

The Netherlands {#chap.netherlands}
===============

author:\[Dammers,Wouter\] author:\[van Kerkvoorden,Wanda\]

Introduction to software protection under Dutch law {#nl_intro}
---------------------------------------------------

### Body of law {#nl_bodyoflaw}

In the Netherlands, the protection of software by copyright is regulated
in the Dutch Copyright Act (“Auteurswet”, hereafter: “Copyright Act” or
abbreviated as “CA”). This law transposes[^445] the provisions of
Council Directive (91/250/EEC) of 14 May 1991 on the legal protection of
computer programs[^446] (hereafter: “Software Directive”) into Chapter
VI of the Copyright Act.

As the Software Directive is transposed into the Copyright Act itself,
the regulatory regime for the legal protection of computer programs is
no different than for other literary, scientific or artistic works
(“works”). Chapter VI of the Copyright Act, however, contains special
provisions with regard to computer programs.

### Copyright Act: Object of protection {#nl_copyrightact}

Chapter 1, paragraph 3 of the Copyright Act refers to the works
protected by copyright. Article 10, paragraph 1 states that, for the
purposes of the Copyright Act, works include (amongst others) computer
programs and the preparatory material.[^447] Thus, all computer
programs,[^448] including the preparatory material,[^449] are subject to
the Copyright Act.[^450] Note that the expression (in any form) of a
computer program is protected. Ideas and principles which underlie any
element of a program, including those which underlie its interfaces, are
not protected by copyright.[^451]

According to Dutch case law, only works that have their own, original
character and posses the personal stamp of the author[^452] can benefit
from copyright protection. This means that the work’s form must not be
derived from any other work, and should be the result of the
intellectual creation of human labour. Thus, the author should have made
it’s own creative choices, i.e. choices that are the product of it’s own
human mind.[^453] There should be a creative performance of the author
that is reflected in its work. Thus technical, objective and inventive
works are not subject to the creativity that the Copyright Act
protects.[^454]

The Dutch requirements that a work should have its “own, original
character" and that it should posses "the personal stamp of the author”
seems to differ from Article 1, paragraph 2, of the Software Directive:
“A computer program shall be protected if it is original in the sense
that it is the author’s own intellectual creation. No other criteria
shall be applied to determine its eligibility for protection”. Thus, if
a computer program is an independent product of own creation, the
requirement of originality should be fulfilled.[^455]

Until very recently[^456] the Copyright Act also gave limited[^457]
protection for writings that are not original:[^458] the protection of
writings (“geschriftenbescherming”), Article 10, paragraph 1, sub 1 CA.
However, according to Article 10, paragraph 5, computer programs were
already expressly excluded from this protection of writings.[^459].

### Authors/Beneficiaries {#nl_authors}

The Copyright Act does not explicitly state that the actual creator of a
work is the copyright owner. Nevertheless, when one reads Article 1
CA — which stipulates that copyright is the exclusive right of the
author of a work,[^460] or his successors in title, to communicate that
work to the public and to reproduce it, subject to the limitations laid
down by law — in conjunction with Articles 4 — 9 CA, it is made clear
that, in principle, the person who has created the computer program is
the author of the work and thus the copyright owner.[^461]

#### Rules of evidence {#_rules_of_evidence}

Article 4 CA provides the statutory rules of evidence: the person who is
named as the author in or on the work or — for instance the name of the
person, or the user of, or the entitled party to the logo or
brand — shall be deemed the author of the work. If there is no such
indication, then the person who, when the work is communicated to the
public, is named the author by the party making the work known to the
public, shall be deemed the author of the work, unless there is proof to
the contrary. If the author is not named, the person who delivers a
recitation which has not appeared in print shall be deemed the author
thereof, unless there is proof to the contrary.[^462]

#### Compilations {#_compilations}

With regard to compilations, Article 5, paragraph 1, CA provides that,
if a work consists of separate works by two or more persons, then the
person under whose guidance and supervision the work as a whole has been
made or, if there is no such person, the compiler of the various works,
will be deemed the author of the whole work, without prejudice to the
separate copyright in each of the works.[^463]

#### Joint works {#_joint_works_2}

With regard to joint works, Article 26 CA, provides that, when the
copyright in a work belongs jointly to two or more persons, it may be
enforced by either one of them, unless agreed otherwise.[^464] The
rights to a joint work can, in principle, only be enjoyed if both
authors agree upon such enjoyment (Article 3:166 ff. of the Dutch Civil
Code (“Burgerlijk Wetboek”, hereafter: “Civil Code” or “CC”)).[^465]

#### Fictional authorship {#_fictional_authorship}

Article 6 CA states that if a work has been made according to the draft
and under the guidance and supervision of another person, then that
person will be deemed to be the author of the work. If the supervisor,
however, has provided such a detailed design of the computer program
that the final programming is nothing more than just a straightforward,
non-creative process, then the supervisor, in this event, is deemed to
be the author of the computer program.[^466]

More importantly, Article 7 CA provides that, where the labour carried
out by an employee consists of the making of certain works,[^467] then
the employer will be deemed to be the author unless otherwise agreed
between the parties.[^468] Note that this article only applies to the
employer/employee relationship. Thus, if such a relationship is absent,
this article does not apply. However, in the event of, for example,
secondment, freelancing or traineeships, one of the parties has to agree
explicitly, by deed of transfer,[^469] that the copyright will be
assigned to the company.

Public institutions, associations, foundations and/or companies which
communicate a work to the public (“openbaarmaken”) as its own, without
naming any natural person as its author, will be regarded as the author
of that work, unless it is proved that the communication to the public
in such a manner was unlawful, according to Article 8 CA.

### Exclusive rights {#nl_exclusive}

The author of a work has the exclusive right to communicate the work to
the public (“openbaarmaken”, Articles 1 and 12 CA)[^470] and to
reproduce it (“verveelvoudigen”, Articles 1 and 13 CA)[^471], subject to
the limitations laid down by law. The special provisions concerning
computer programs, as provided by Article 4 of the Software
Directive,[^472] are implemented into Article 45j — 45n CA.[^473] As a
consequence, communicating to the public includes selling or offering to
sell the carrier of the software, or making the software available for
third parties to consult. According to Article 45h CA, the rental of
computer programs is also a communication to the public. Reproduction
includes the normal use of computer programs, including the correction
of errors (Article 45j CA); the reproduction of a back-up (Article 45k
CA); the observation, study or testing of the computer program (Article
45l CA); as well as the decompilation of the computer program (Article
45m CA).

### Exceptions to exclusive rights {#nl_exceptions}

Articles 15-17c CA[^474] provide general exceptions to the copyright of
the author, including for instance the right to quote from works that
are communicated to the public by or on behalf of public authorities,
public lending rights and the use of works for teaching purposes.

Another exception is provided by the first sale doctrine[^475] and
Article 4 sub c of the Software Directive, which stipulate that the
first sale[^476] in the Community[^477] of a copy of a program by the
rightholder, or with his consent, will exhaust the distribution right of
that copy within the Community, with the exception of the right to
control further rental of the program or a copy thereof. The ECJ decided
that this first sale doctrine also applies to standard software
downloaded from the internet: an owner of copyright in software cannot
prevent a perpetual licensee who has downloaded the software from the
internet from selling his ‘used’ licence.[^478]

The Articles 45j — 45n CA provide the special exceptions to the
exclusive rights concerning computer programs, based on Articles 5 and 6
of the Software Directive.

#### Reproduction of software {#_reproduction_of_software}

Article 45j CA[^479] provides that the reproduction of a computer
program by the lawful acquirer[^480] of a copy of the said work, when
this is necessary for the use of the work for its intended
purpose,[^481] shall not be deemed an infringement of copyright.[^482]
Such reproduction, in connection with the loading, displaying or
correcting of errors[^483] cannot be prohibited by contract.[^484]

#### Back-ups of software {#_back_ups_of_software}

Article 45k CA[^485] provides that the reproduction of a computer
program by the lawful user[^486] of the said work, serving as a back-up
copy, where this is necessary for the use of the work for its intended
purpose, shall not be deemed an infringement of copyright.[^487]

#### Ideas and principles {#_ideas_and_principles}

Article 45l CA[^488] provides that a person who is entitled to reproduce
the software program, which includes the loading, displaying, running,
transmission and storage, insofar as these acts are necessary for the
reproduction of said work, shall also be entitled, while performing
those acts, to observe, study or test the functioning of the work in
order to determine the ideas and principles underlying it. The rightful
user is allowed to use tools such as electronic testing and controlling
tools.[^489]

#### Decompilation {#_decompilation}

Article 45m CA[^490] states that the making of a copy of a computer
program and the translation of the form of its code shall not be deemed
an infringement of copyright if these acts are indispensable for
obtaining information[^491] necessary to achieve the interoperability of
an independently created computer program with other programs,[^492]
provided that: a) these acts are carried out by a person who has
lawfully[^493] obtained a copy of the computer program or by a third
party authorised by him to carry them out; b) the information necessary
to achieve interoperability is not already readily available[^494] to
the persons referred to under a.; and c) these acts are limited to the
parts of the original program which are necessary to achieve
interoperability. The information obtained must not: i) be used for any
other purpose than to achieve the interoperability of the independently
created computer program; ii) be given to third parties except where
necessary for the interoperability of the independently created computer
program; iii) be used for the development, production or marketing of a
computer program that cannot be regarded as a new, original work or for
any other act which infringes copyright.

### Moral rights {#nl_moral}

The author of the work also has moral rights, or so-called personality
rights (“persoonlijkheidsrechten”).[^495] These rights protect the
relationship between the author[^496] and his work and includes the
right for the author of a work — even after assignment of his
copyright[^497]  — (a) to oppose the communication to the public of the
work, without acknowledgement of his name or other indication as author,
unless such opposition would be unreasonable; (b) to oppose the
communication to the public of the work under a name other than his own,
and any alteration in the name of the work or the indication of the
author, in so far as it appears on or in the work or has been
communicated to the public in connection with the work; (c) to oppose
any other alteration of the work, unless the nature of the alteration is
such that opposition would be unreasonable; and (d) to oppose any
distortion, mutilation or other impairment of the work that could be
prejudicial to the name or reputation of the author or to his dignity as
such. Personality rights are inalienable, but some may be waived (see
sub a), or may be waived in so far as alterations to the work or its
title are concerned (see sub b and c), in accordance with Article 25
CA.[^498]

### Term of protection {#nl_protection}

For all works, including computer programs, the term of protection is 70
years as of January 1st following the death of the author (Article 37,
paragraph 1 CA) or of the surviving author if more than one person is
the joint author (Article 37, paragraph 2 CA). If the author is a legal
entity this term begins on the January 1st following the first
communication to the public (Article 38 CA).[^499]

### Special measures {#nl_measures}

The Copyright Act provides the measures for enforcing copyrights.
Besides the general measures, the Articles 31-36 CA set out specific
criminal sanctions against copyright infringers and provide
investigative powers for investigation officers. On the basis of these
articles, for instance, a person who intentionally infringes another
person’s copyright, or who intentionally (a) publicly offers for
distribution, (b) has in his possession for the purpose of reproduction
or distribution, (c) imports, conveys in transit or exports, or (d)
keeps for profit an object containing a work which infringes another
person’s copyright, is liable to a term of imprisonment of not more than
six months or a fine of EUR 18,500. If these acts are committed by a
person in the conduct of his profession or business, then that person is
liable to a term of imprisonment of not more than four years or a fine
of EUR 74,000. If a person acts in a manner stated under (a) to (d), and
there are reasonable grounds to know that the object contains a work
which infringes another person’s copyright, he is liable to a fine of
EUR 7,400. If a person intentionally acts in a manner stated under (a)
to (d), any means designed exclusively to facilitate the removal or
overriding, without the consent of the author or his successor in title,
of a technical device for the protection of a computer program, is
liable to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months or a fine
of EUR 18,500. A person who intentionally makes any unlawful alterations
to a work which is protected by copyright, or to its title or to the
indication of the author or impairs such a work in any other way that
could be prejudicial to the name or reputation of the author, or his
dignity as such, is liable to a term of imprisonment of not more than
six months or a fine of EUR 18,500. All these acts constitute serious
offences. Moreover, reproductions which are declared forfeit by the
criminal court shall be destroyed, according to Article 36 CA, or may be
handed over to the copyright owner, if the latter applies to the office
of the Clerk within one month of the judgment becoming final and
conclusive. Upon such handing over, ownership of the reproductions shall
be assigned to the rightholder. The court may order that the handing
over be conditional on payment by the rightholder of an amount of
compensation that shall accrue to the State.

According to Article 36a CA, investigating officers may at any time, for
the purposes of investigating offences which are punishable under the
Copyright Act, require access to any documents or other data carriers in
the possession of persons who, in the exercise of their profession or
business, import into the Netherlands, communicate to the public or
reproduce works, where inspection of such documents or data carriers may
reasonably be deemed necessary for the performance of their duties.
Moreover, on the basis of Article 36b CA, investigating officers are
authorised to enter any premises to investigate offences which are
punishable under the Copyright Act and to seize that which is subject to
seizure. If they are denied access, they may gain entry, if necessary
with the assistance of the police. They shall not enter a house against
the will of the occupant unless a special warrant is presented in
writing from — or in the presence of — a public prosecutor or an
assistant public prosecutor. An official report of such entry shall be
drawn up by them within twenty-four hours.

Unprotected software and public domain software {#nl_unprotected}
-----------------------------------------------

As set forth above, only software that is original in the sense that it
is an intellectual creation of the author benefits from copyright
protection. Non-original software does not come into consideration for
copyright protection and can, in principle, be used freely. In the
Netherlands there is little to no case law about public domain software.

Analysis of free and open source software under Dutch law {#nl_analysis}
---------------------------------------------------------

### Copyrights {#nl_copyrights}

One of the most important characteristics of free and open source
software (“FOSS”) is that it is developed by the efforts of many
programmers. The work evolves continuously through the improvements,
additions and changes made by the open source community. These
characteristics may have several legal effects. It is important,
therefore, to examine, for instance, whether FOSS could qualify as a
collaborative work under Dutch law; who owns the copyrights to FOSS
software; and are contributions in themselves protected works in the
sense of the Copyright Act?

#### Qualification of FOSS {#_qualification_of_foss_6}

More than any other type of computer program, FOSS is often the result
of collaborative work between software developers. Modifications to FOSS
can either be distributed as separate computer programs or integrated in
the initial computer program.

Whether the collaborators could be regarded as authors in the terms of
the Copyright Act depends, amongst other things (including the question
whether Dutch law applies), on the extent of their creative input. Under
Dutch law, each contribution may be protected under the Copyright Act if
it meets the criterion of originality, either as a separate computer
program or one which is integrated into the original computer program.
Often, small contributions such as “bug-fixes” will not be protected
under the Copyright Act, and thus, not all contributors will become
authors.[^500]

It is important, therefore, to examine whether a contributor is the
author of their particular contribution to FOSS, as only the author has
the right to decide on the use of the work.[^501]

If the FOSS is developed by an employed programmer, the employer, in
principle, will be deemed to be the author of the work (Article 7 CA).
If the employee is seconded, one can argue analogously that the
copyrights then belong to the hirer.[^502] If a public or private entity
communicates the work to the public without naming any natural person as
author, that entity will be regarded as the author of the FOSS, unless
the communication to the public in this manner was unlawful. In all of
these situations it is better to avoid uncertainty by mutually and
contractually agreeing that eventual emergence of copyright on created
works will be transferred to the employer, the hirer or the (public or
private) entity.[^503]

One can also think of situations where contributions by a number of
parties have led to the creation of just one work. The Copyright Act
does not provide many explicit provisions for cases such as these (just
Article 26 CA, regarding the enforcement of joint authorship).
Nevertheless, case law has developed the rules regarding the authorship
and ownership of works created by multiple authors. These rules
distinguish, on the one hand, situations where the work is the result of
such close co-operation between authors that individual contributions
cannot be separated from other contributions, and, on the other hand,
situations where the individual contributions are clearly
identifiable.[^504] Notwithstanding any specific contractual
arrangements, if the contributions can be distinguished, then each
author enjoys a separate right on his own particular contribution. If
the contributions are all combined into one work, then all the authors
enjoy the rights on the work in joint ownership; this means the rights
can only be exercised with the consent of every author.[^505]

Finally, copyrights on FOSS — just as for any other works — can also be
obtained by succession or transfer.

#### Rights of the original (co-)authors {#_rights_of_the_original_co_authors_4}

As stated, the author of a work has the exclusive right to communicate
his work to the public and to make reproductions. This also means that
the author can forbid or allow others to take these actions. Many FOSS
licences do not restrict (*copyright*) the use of the software but allow
(*copyleft*) others to use it under certain conditions in order to
ensure the free and open character of the (modified) software.

#### Authors of modifications {#_authors_of_modifications}

As FOSS has developed, works are often built on the basis of another
FOSS work that has been created by other individuals. In this light, it
is important to distinguish between two *legal* ways of making
modifications which are set out in Article 10, paragraph 2 and Article
13 CA.

On the one hand, Article 10, paragraph 2 CA states that reproductions of
a work and other adaptations and collections of different works will be
protected as if they were separate works, without prejudice to the
copyright on the original work. Thus, if a modification to FOSS can be
regarded as a new and original work, it is a new copyright protected
work, and in principle, the exclusive right of the contributor.

On the other hand (which in practice is more likely), Article 13 CA
states that the reproduction of a work generally includes any partial or
total adaptation or imitation in a modified form, which cannot be
regarded as a new, original form. Thus, a modification to FOSS that
cannot be regarded as a new and original work is considered to be a
reproduction of the original work and, in principle, the exclusive right
of the person entitled to the original FOSS.

Certain FOSS licences stipulate that derivative works should be
distributed under the same licence terms as the original work. The term
“derivative work” is not known in the Netherlands, but Article 10,
paragraph 2 and Article 13 CA may provide guidance as to how it should
be defined.[^506]

### Moral copyrights {#nl_moralcopyrights}

Moral rights play a more important role in relation to FOSS than they do
for closed source software. The reason for this is because FOSS values
the recognition of contributors very highly.[^507] Nevertheless, moral
rights may also conflict with the ideas underpinning FOSS: the right to
oppose any alteration of the work may conflict with the *freedom* to
tinker[^508] or with forked projects. The Open Source Definition even
specifies that authors of FOSS cannot oppose the use of the software by
certain people and groups or for certain areas of application.[^509]

However, in theory, the moral rights holders may oppose such
alterations. Nevertheless, in practise, acknowledgments are desirable in
FOSS communities. Many FOSS licences even oblige contributors to mention
their names and their modifications in the mandatory notice.[^510]

### Enforcing FOSS licences {#nl_enforcing}

If the FOSS is used, or distributed, in a way that is not allowed under
the relevant FOSS licence and the law, then it amounts, in principle, to
copyright infringement. The rightholders — or any one of them, unless
agreed otherwise — can enforce their rights by seeking an injunction,
compensation for damages, surrender of profits and seizure or
destruction of the infringing software. In principle, licences do not
have enforcement rights such as these, unless they are given the
authorisation by the licensor. Most FOSS licences do not give this
authorisation. In order to enforce FOSS licences effectively, the Free
Software Foundation encourages the authors of FOSS to assign their
rights to the software to the Free Software Foundation.

As FOSS licences have important differences from “normal” software
licences, and most FOSS licences were developed from an Anglo-American
perspective, it gives rise to the question as to whether the formation
and content of the applicable FOSS licence would comply with Dutch law.
How should the licence be qualified? Who are the contracting parties? Is
its form and content valid under Dutch law?

#### Introduction to the Dutch legal system {#_introduction_to_the_dutch_legal_system}

For a good understanding of the Dutch attitudes to FOSS licences and to
appreciate the suggestions made about the contents of FOSS licences, it
is necessary to briefly explain the pillars of the Dutch legal system.

In general, Dutch law does not provide mandatory requirements for the
formation and content of an agreement. Thus, in principle, contracting
parties have a lot of freedom. Moreover, Book 6 of the Dutch Civil Code
provides a solid, though flexible, basis for contracting parties and
sets out provisions that regulate the relationship between the
contracting parties and the consequences of agreements. Most of these
provisions have an additional effect, but some of them are mandatory
(predominantly when regulating the relationship between professional
parties and consumers). As most provisions are reasonably balanced, it
is not necessary to include clauses in contracts regarding issues that
are already included in the Dutch Civil Code, unless parties explicitly
want to differ from these statutory provisions.

One of the most important principles in the Dutch Civil Code is the
principle of reasonableness and fairness (“redelijkheid en billijkheid”)
which is laid down in Articles 6:2 and 6:248 CC. This principle is
implied in all agreements and has both an added effect as well as a
derogatory one. It may have legal consequences on the agreement made
between the contracting parties, but it could also affect the validity
of the contractual terms in a way that the parties did not contemplate
or intend when they entered into the contract. For instance, a
contractual clause may not apply, if under the given circumstances,
according to reasonableness and fairness, a clause such as this would be
unacceptable.[^511]

#### Nature of the agreement {#_nature_of_the_agreement}

FOSS licences are agreements that create mutual obligations for the
contracting parties. Although FOSS licences have not yet been “tested”
in Dutch courts, most commentators argue that open source agreements can
be qualified as a contract under Dutch law, in the same way as any other
software agreement can. A contract consists in the parties'
manifestation of their actual or apparent intention to be bound by
obligations and to give them legal effect.[^512] FOSS licences are
generally referred to as licence contracts, which actually form an
unnamed category of contracts in the Dutch Civil Code. What the nature
of the relevant FOSS licence is, should be examined on a case-by-case
basis, in accordance with the intention of the parties. The object of
the licence is to regulate the private law aspects of the transaction of
the licensed rights, such as the extent of the guarantee granted on the
FOSS, and the copyright law aspects of it, such as the extent of the use
that the licensee is entitled to make of the copyright protected
FOSS.[^513] Upon examining the legal nature of software licences, most
Dutch commentators argue that software licences should be seen as
conferring a right of use (“gebruiksrecht”) on the licensee.
Accordingly, a software licence must be regarded as an agreement whereby
the licensor grants the licensee permission to perform certain acts with
respect to a copyrighted work, which would otherwise be prohibited on
the basis of the licensor’s exclusive right on the work. The majority of
FOSS licences, therefore, do not substantially differ from most
conventional software licence agreements.[^514]

#### Contracting parties {#_contracting_parties_3}

Who are the contracting parties to a FOSS licence? It is clear that the
licensee is one — this is the person who is using a copy of the
FOSS — but who is the licensor? The text of a FOSS licence does not
always contain a clear indication of the name(s) of the licensor(s), let
alone the address(es) of the natural or legal person(s) granting the
licence. As said, the question as to who is the copyright owner is a
factual one which must be decided on a case-by-case basis, taking into
account eventual subsequent transfers of copyrights. It is more
difficult to examine who the licensor is: this has to be established
according to the principle laid down in the *Haviltex* case. This
landmark case states that one should take into account the respective
expectations of the parties concerned.[^515]

The licensor and the copyright owner can be the same person, but not
necessarily. Following the FOSS ideology one would argue that the
licensee receives the licence from all the other developers in the
chain. However, as the licence is not clear about the identity of the
licensors at each step of the development process, it is unclear for a
subsequent user to determine who he is contractually bound with. In
practice, little case law has emerged in relation to FOSS licences and
so the difficulty of ascertaining the identity of the parties to the
agreement has not raised any legal difficulties, yet. Nevertheless,
whoever the licensor may be, the licensee has a right to expect that the
(legal or natural) person granting the licence is indeed competent to do
so. The next question is whether the licence agreement is properly
formulated so as to bind the user.[^516]

#### Validity of the contract {#_validity_of_the_contract_3}

FOSS is made available to users in various ways. The terms of the FOSS
licence may appear in a variety of ways as well. For instance, for
online distribution, the terms of the licence may be programmed to
appear on the user’s computer screen display, or the user may download
the FOSS only after he has given his consent to the terms of the online
screen licence, by clicking the tick box “Yes, I agree to these terms of
use”. The user can also be linked to the licence terms somewhere else
online. In other cases, the user may even be expected to consult the
COPYING or LICENSE file that is distributed with the software. For
offline distribution, FOSS licences are often inserted in an instruction
manual or packed inside a box, or only communicated to the user when the
software is installed.[^517] Do these acts constitute a legal agreement
between the concerned parties, under Dutch law?

Article 6:213 CC defines a contract as a multilateral juridical act
under which one or more of the parties assumes an obligation towards one
or more of the other parties. Juridical acts require an intention to
produce a juridical effect, an intention which is manifested by a
declaration (Article 3:33 CC).[^518] The absence of intention
corresponding with that declaration cannot be invoked against a person
who interpreted another person’s declaration or conduct in conformity
with the sense which he could reasonably attributed to it in the
circumstances as a declaration of particular implication made to him by
that other person (Article 3:35 CC). Thus, the impression created by
someone’s apparent intention to produce juridical effects is enough
cause for it to qualify as a juridical act.

Article 6:217 CC provides that the multilateral juridical act is formed
by the exchange of an offer and its acceptance.[^519] With regard to
juridical acts which are done for free (juridical acts for no
consideration, “rechtshandelingen om niet”), acceptance is presumed to
have taken place more rapidly.[^520]

Note that contracts can be validly concluded via electronic means,
irrespective of whether a consumer is involved in the transaction or
not.[^521] However, for electronic transactions by “Information Society
Services”[^522] the Dutch laws requires that anyone who provides an
Information Society Service must make certain information accessible to
the recipients of the service in an easy, direct and permanent manner
(Article 3:15d CC).[^523]

Moreover Article 6:227b CC provides that, before a contract is concluded
via electronic means, any Internet Society Service is required to give
certain information in a clear, comprehensible and unambiguous way to
the other party. More specifically, the Information Society Service must
indicate the different technical steps which must be taken in order to
conclude the contract,[^524] and it should specify the technical means
for identifying and correcting input errors, prior to the placing of the
order. Before or during the conclusion of the contract, the Information
Society Service must make the terms available to the recipient in a way
that allows him to store and reproduce them so that he can access them
at a later stage. Failure to comply with the obligations of Article
6:227b CC can result in annulment of the contract or the contract can be
presumed null.

Besides that, a distinction should be made between professional users
and consumers, since one would expect that professional users, more than
ordinary consumers, would be aware of the FOSS licence. Moreover, the
user may also be bound to the terms of the licence by the sheer act of
reproducing, modifying or distributing the software.[^525] The criterion
is, in our opinion, whether the user actually accepted the legal
consequences of his actions, and whether he accomplished these actions
with the specific intention of being bound by the licence.[^526]

#### General terms and conditions {#_general_terms_and_conditions}

Moreover, FOSS licences generally take the form of a standard agreement,
or of general terms and conditions (“algemene voorwaarden”), insofar as
the terms of the licence are not individually negotiated between the
licensor and licensee.[^527] For this reason, the European and Dutch
legislature have subjected the use of general terms and conditions to
legal requirements relating to the formation of such contracts, even if
a user has manifested his intention to be bound by the terms. Article
6:232 CC provides that the other party is bound by the general terms and
conditions even if, at the time of entering into the contract, the user
understands, or ought to understand, that the other party did not know
the content of the conditions. The intention to enter into the contract
needs to be directed to the applicability of the whole set of conditions
to the actual transaction. When accepted, the other party cannot invoke
the fact that he was not aware of the content of the terms.[^528] The
other party must have been given sufficient opportunity to acknowledge
the general terms and conditions before, or during, the formation of the
contract (Article 6:233b CC). Specifically for contracts concluded by
electronic means, Article 6:234 CC provides that an Information Society
Service must make the general terms and conditions available to the
other party during, or before, the formation of the contract in such a
manner that allows the other party to store and reproduce them so that
he can access them at a later stage. If this is not reasonably possible,
the user of the general terms and conditions must inform the other
party, before the conclusion of the contract, of the site where the
conditions may be electronically consulted, and of the fact that a copy
of the general terms and conditions may, upon request, be sent
electronically or by other means to the other party. In determining
whether the other party was given sufficient opportunity to take notice
of the general terms and conditions, a Dutch court will make a
distinction between professional users and ordinary consumers. Thus, the
key question is whether the other party understood or must have
understood, by ticking a box “I agree” or by performing another certain
act, that he accepted the applicability of the general terms and
conditions.[^529]

The manner in which FOSS licences are presented to the other party
varies considerably. Therefore, a case-by-case examination must be
completed to ascertain whether the FOSS distributor is complying with
the mentioned legal requirements and whether the mere act by a user of
downloading FOSS onto his computer constitutes a manifestation of
intention on his part to be bound by the licence agreement.
Nevertheless, in the light of the foregoing, we believe that the FOSS
community should adapt its licensing practises to ensure that the
contract formation process meets the requirements of the law.

### Waiver and liability {#nl_waiver}

In the case of software one can think of three possible forms of
liability: liability resulting from a) breach of contract (Article 6:74
CC); b) tort (“onrechtmatige daad”) (Article 6:162 CC); or c) product
liability (Article 6:185 CC and following). However, most FOSS licences
contain provisions according to which the licensor limits all his
liability for damages which result directly or indirectly from the use
of the program. The question is whether such a (full) limitation of
liability is valid under Dutch law.

As a result of the principle of the freedom of contract,[^530] a
limitation or exclusion of one’s liability in a “business-to-business”
relationship is, in principle, permitted under Dutch law. However, this
freedom of contract is restricted by a number of legal provisions. For
instance, limitation or exclusion of liability may not be contrary to
common decency (“goede zeden”) (Article 3:40 CC).[^531] Thus, it is
generally accepted that an agreement which limits a person’s liability
for damages which were caused by his own deliberate behaviour, is void.
Similarly, liability for damages which result from a person’s own gross
negligence cannot be restricted. Also, if the agreement is not
acceptable according to the principle of reasonableness and fairness
(“redelijkheid en billijkheid”) (Art. 6:248, paragraph 2 CC), then the
agreement is invalid.[^532] Nevertheless, limitation of liability for
software is not considered to be unreasonable per se. Thus, the
assessment of a limitation or exclusion of liability should be dealt
with on a case-by-case basis.[^533]

Consumers or small businesses benefit from a protective regime.[^534]
This protective regime states, in Article 6:233 CC, that a clause in the
general terms and conditions can be voidable if the clause is
“unreasonably onerous” (“onredelijk bezwarend”) when one considers the
nature and further content of the agreement, the way in which the
general terms and conditions are formed, the mutual knowable interests
of both parties and the remaining circumstances of the case.[^535] In
addition, Articles 6:236 and 6:237 CC contain a “black list” and a “grey
list” (respectively) of terms that are either invalid because they are
regarded as unreasonably onerous to the other party or are terms that,
unless proven otherwise, are presumed to be unreasonably onerous. For
FOSS licences, it is important to note Article 6:237 sub f CC as this
article provides that a term is deemed to be unreasonably onerous if it
frees the user or a third person, in whole, or in part, from a legal
obligation to repair damage. The fact that most FOSS licences are
distributed for free constitutes an important factor to take into
consideration when evaluating the onerous character of the limitation of
liability. Nevertheless, circumstances may illustrate that the
limitation or exclusion of liability cannot be upheld.

Article 6:185 CC provides that the producer shall be liable for the
damage caused by a defect in his product, unless the product has not
been manufactured for the purpose of sale by the producer or for any
other form of distribution by him with an economic object; or unless it
has not been manufactured or distributed within the framework of the
course of his profession or business. Nevertheless, we argue that
product liability may possibly be irrelevant for FOSS, as software may
not be qualified as a “product”.[^536]

### The copyleft principle {#nl_copyleft}

#### Principle {#_principle_6}

The copyleft principle, or share-alike principle, in FOSS licences
purports to perpetuate certain obligations under the licence from one
developer or distributor to another. Thus, everyone in the chain of the
FOSS licence needs to distribute the FOSS, including their own
contributions, and/or derivative works, under the same FOSS licence to
other users, if they choose to distribute such contributions and/or
derivative works. In return, the developer can make free use of the
FOSS, in accordance with the terms of the applicable licence.

#### Validity {#_validity_5}

The copyleft clause raises a number of questions under Dutch law. More
specifically, one could ask oneself how obligations are passed on to a
subsequent licensee and do the rights and obligations under a FOSS
licence bind the subsequent licensee? And thus, is a contract
automatically formed every time the FOSS is distributed?[^537]

The question of the binding character of a copyleft clause is a matter
of the doctrine of offer and acceptance (as discussed above), and the
legal requirements regarding the presentation of the general terms and
conditions of sale to the other party. The licensee may obtain an
automatic licence from the initial licensor, but this does not mean that
the sublicensee has automatically accepted it.[^538] However, the
sublicence may be automatically accepted if the acceptance can be
inferred from the conduct of the sublicensor. As already indicated, the
binding character of the copyleft clause is complex due to the fact that
the identity of the licensor(s) is/are not always made clear. All in
all, the process of the formation of a contract is a very important
issue with regard to FOSS licences.

In Dutch literature,[^539] the copyleft clause has been interpreted in
light of the principle of the relative effect of contracts and of the
third party effects of an agreement. These principles mean that a legal
action between parties can only have an effect on those contracting
parties. Thus, third parties are not affected by a contract to which
they are not bound. As a consequence, the rights created under a
contract are relative rights: they are only enforceable against the
other party to the contract. The copyleft clause in FOSS licences may be
passed onto a sublicensee according to Article 6:253 CC. This article
states that an agreement creates the right for a third party to claim a
performance from one of the parties, or to appeal against one of them
regarding the observance of their agreement, if the agreement contains a
stipulation to that effect (a third-party clause) and the third party
has accepted this stipulation. A stipulation of the sort referred to in
the previous sentence (third-party clause) may be revoked by the person
who has stipulated it until the time that it is accepted by the third
party. An acceptance or rejection of the stipulation (third-party
clause) is made by a third party making a declaration to one of the
parties to the agreement. If the third-party clause has been made
irrevocable and it has been stipulated, towards the third party, for no
consideration, it will be regarded to have been accepted if the third
party did not reject it immediately after he obtained knowledge of its
existence. In the context of some FOSS licences, it is not clear whether
the licensee has accepted or rejected such stipulations. The
construction of the copyleft clauses in FOSS licences fails to
accurately reflect this process. The clause creates a relationship
between the licensor and each of the licensees, regardless of the number
of legal transactions between them.[^540]

### Legal remedies {#nl_remedies}

If one does not comply with the provisions of the relevant FOSS licence,
one may infringe the copyrights of the author and/or commit a breach of
contract. Notwithstanding the limitations and exclusions of liability in
most FOSS licences, Dutch law provides the rightholder with several
legal remedies for both situations. The most suitable course of action
may depend on the specific facts of the particular case.

#### Damages {#_damages}

For instance, on the basis of Article 27 CA, the author retains his
right — even after assignment of his copyright wholly or in part to
another — to bring an action for damages[^541] against persons who
infringe his copyright. After his death, this right belongs to his
successors or legatees, until the copyright expires.

In addition to claiming damages,[^542] Article 27a CA provides the
author or his successor in title with the right to request the court to
order anyone who has infringed the copyright to surrender the
profits[^543] flowing from the infringement and to render account
therefor. These claims may also be filed by the author, or his successor
in title, partly or wholly on behalf of a licensee, without prejudice to
the licencee’s right to intervene in the proceedings instituted
independently or partly or wholly on his behalf by the author, or his
successor in title, in order to obtain compensation for the damage he
has suffered, or to obtain a proportionate share of the profits to be
surrendered by the defendant. A licensee may only file these claims if
he has obtained the authority to do so from the author or his successor
in title.

The Copyright Act does not provide specific provisions concerning the
accountability for the damages, the different kinds of damage and how
the damages should be calculated. One should, therefore, take into
account Section 10, Title 1, Book 6 of the Dutch Civil Code, as
discussed below.[^544]

On the basis of Article 6:74 CC, every imperfection in compliance with
an obligation is considered to amount to non-performance of the debtor
and makes him liable for the damage which the creditor suffers as a
result, unless the non-performance cannot be attributed to the debtor.
Save to the extent that the performance is and will remain impossible,
the debtor is only liable if he is in default, on the grounds of the
Articles 6:81-6:83 CC (as described above).

Article 6:81 CC provides that the debtor is in default (“verzuim”)
during the period that the performance of the obligation is not once it
has become exigible and the requirements of Articles 6:82 and 6:83 CC
have been met, unless the delay cannot be attributed to him or it has
become permanently impossible for him to perform the obligation.

Article 6:82 CC states that default commences when the debtor is given
written notice of default (“ingebrekestelling”), in which the creditor
grants him a reasonable period of time during which he still may perform
in conformity with his obligation, and there is no performance within
that period. If the debtor is temporarily unable to perform or if it has
become clear from his attitude that a warning would serve no purpose,
then he may be held liable solely by a written notice to the effect that
he is held liable for his non-performance.

Finally, Article 6:83 CC provides that the debtor will automatically be
in default, without the necessity of a prior letter of formal notice to
perform or a notice in which he is held liable for his non-performance:
(a) when the obligation is subject to a time stipulation (expiry date)
and he has failed to perform within the specified period, unless this
time stipulation has another purpose; (b) when the obligation results
from tort (“onrechtmatige daad”, Article 6:162 CC) or when it forces the
debtor to pay for damages as meant in Article 6:74 paragraph 1 CC, and
the obligation is not performed instantly; or (c) when the creditor must
conclude from a communication from the debtor that the latter will fail
in the performance of the obligation.

In the event that the debtor is indeed liable, Section 10, Title 1, Book
6 of the Dutch Civil Code applies. For relevance to the FOSS context we
will only discuss some of the articles. Article 6:95 CC states that the
damage that has to be compensated by virtue of a statutory obligation to
repair damages (due by virtue of law), consists of loss to property,
rights and interests and other prejudice, the latter as far as the law
confers a right to damages therefor. According to Article 6:96 CC loss
to property, rights and interests includes the loss incurred and the
profit deprived. Also the reasonable costs (a) to prevent or minimise
damage which could be expected to result from the event which caused
someone to be liable; (b) for determining the nature and scope of the
damage and of the liable persons; and (c) for attempts to get
satisfaction via an out of court settlement, but, as far as the costs
under point (b) and (c) are concerned, unless, in the prevailing case,
the provisions for costs of litigation are applicable (Article 241 of
the Dutch Code of Civil Procedure (“Burgerlijke rechtsvordering”,
hereafter: “Code of Civil Procedure” or abbreviated “CCP”), and qualify
for compensation as loss to property, rights and interests. The court
estimates the extent of the damage in the manner that is most consistent
with the nature of the damage caused. Where the extent of the damage
cannot be assessed exactly, it will be estimated (Article 6:97 CC). Only
damage that is connected in such a way to the event that made the debtor
liable, that it, in regard of the nature of his liability and of the
damage caused, can be attributed to him as a consequence of this event,
is eligible for compensation (Article 6:98 CC).

Another important provision is Article 6:104 CC, which concerns the
estimation of damage and the surrender of profits. If someone, who is
liable towards another person on the ground of a tort or failure to
comply with an obligation, has derived profit from this tort or failure,
then the court may, upon the request of the injured person, estimate the
damage in line with the amount of that profit or a part of it.

#### Other legal remedies {#_other_legal_remedies}

As said, the Copyright Act gives the author of a work the exclusive
right to communicate the work to the public and to reproduce it, subject
to the limitations laid down by law. This means that the author can
prohibit others from performing these actions. The copyright owner can
also claim ancillary measures, such as a recall, a rectification, an
account of profits and a claim for damages. More specifically, Article
28 CA[^545] provides that the rightholder may claim goods which are not
filed in the public records and which have been communicated to the
public in violation of the copyright of the author, or are unauthorised
reproductions, as his property. He may also apply for them to be
destroyed or rendered useless. The rightholder may bring a claim for the
surrender of the said goods so that they can be destroyed or rendered
useless. The same right to claim goods exists (amongst others) with
respect to monies that may be assumed to have been obtained by, or as a
result of, an infringement of copyright. The rightholder may also apply
for the destruction or the rendering unusable of goods (or the handing
over of goods — eventually on the condition of payment — so that they
can be destroyed or rendered unusable) which have been used to effect an
infringement of copyright. The licensee will have these rights as well,
so far as their purpose is to protect the rights he is entitled to
exercise.

Besides these copyright-specific measures, the licensor also has some
legal remedies on the basis of the law of obligations. For instance, the
creditor (i.e. the licensor) may immediately[^546] demand performance
(“nakoming”) by the debtor (i.e. the licensee).[^547] This is
specifically an effective remedy for demanding that a licensee make
available the source code of the distributed FOSS, as obliged by the
concerning FOSS licence, if he has not done so already.

Moreover, the creditor also has the possibility of rescinding the FOSS
licence, under certain circumstances. This is regulated by Article 6:265
CC which states that if a party fails in the performance of its
obligations, the opposite party is given the right to rescind the mutual
agreement either in its entirety or in part, unless the failure, given
its specific nature or minor importance, does not justify the rescission
and its legal effects. If performance is not permanently or temporarily
impossible, the right to rescind the mutual agreement only arises when
the debtor is in default (as discussed above). According to Article
6:267 CC, the rescission of a mutual agreement is effectuated by means
of a written notification from the party who is entitled to rescind the
agreement, addressed to the opposite party to that agreement. If the
mutual agreement has been concluded solely by electronic means, it may
be rescinded in a similar manner by means of a notice conveyed to the
other party by electronic means.[^548] A mutual agreement may also be
rescinded by a judgment of the court upon a right of action (legal
claim) of the party who is entitled to rescind the agreement.

A rescission releases the parties from all obligations created by the
rescinded mutual agreement. If these obligations have already been
performed, the legal basis for performance remains effective, but the
law imposes an obligation on the parties to undo the performances they
have already received by virtue of the rescinded agreement. In
situations where the nature of the received performance makes its return
impossible, it is replaced by a compensation of its value, calculated at
the moment on which it was received. Where the received performance was
not in conformity with the obligation, this compensation is limited to
the value of the benefit that the recipient, in the circumstances, has
actually gained from the performance, calculated at the moment on which
he received it. Please note that the rescission of a mutual agreement as
it is used in this context has no retroactive effect, except that an
offer from the debtor to perform his obligation, made at a moment that
the creditor has already brought a right of action (legal claim) to
court in order to rescind the mutual agreement, will have no effect if
the court subsequently decides to rescind that agreement.[^549]

FOSS cases in the Netherlands {#nl_fosscases}
-----------------------------

In the Netherlands, no cases concerning FOSS licences have been reported
yet (July 2010). A search in the case law on the website for the Dutch
judicial system (www.rechtspraak.nl) only gives twelve results
mentioning “open source”, none of which is really relevant to the legal
issues concerning FOSS licences. Two case does, however, briefly deal
with certain FOSS characteristics, but the court does not provide any
final thoughts.[^550] does not address the question as to whether the
incorporation of open source software in Marktplaats'' own software is
allowed. Also, it does not address the question, as to what extent
Marktplaats is obliged to make its own software available, in the event
that such incorporation would be allowed. (Is Marktplaats obliged to
make available its own software (its “crown jewels”, as they themselves
call it), or only the part of the proprietary software that is
associated with the filter that is the subject in this case?)
Nevertheless, the Court finds that it is clear that there would be
necessary costs involved for making use of open source software and
incorporating open source software into Marktplaats'' own software.
There would also be costs involved for Marktplaats for adapting its own
software to the needs of the open source software. Moreover there would
be some drawbacks. Therefore, the Court considered that, in the event of
Marktplaats being required to install a filter, Marktplaats'' choice not
to use open source software is — given the crucial importance of the
software to Marktplaats — a perfectly legitimate one.\][^551] Thus, as
stated earlier in this article, the Netherlands is still waiting for its
first “real” FOSS case before any certainty on the different legal
issues can be established.

Legal procedures {#nl_procedures}
----------------

### Parties {#nl_parties}

Depending on the circumstances of the case, the FOSS licensor may need
to enforce his rights either on the basis of an alleged breach of the
contractual obligations of the FOSS licence, and/or on the basis of an
alleged infringement of copyright. As previously mentioned, one of the
issues in this case is the difficulty of establishing the chain of
ownership of rights on the FOSS. A consequence thereof is that it may be
unclear who is entitled to institute proceedings against alleged
infringers. Therefore, one should first enquire who the parties to the
licence are. Also the question of authorship of rights with respect to
the FOSS is of importance to determine who is entitled to exercise the
exclusive rights on the software.

For instance, the authors of a work whose individual contributions
cannot be distinguished cannot exercise their copyrights without the
consent of the other co-authors; if the contributions can be
distinguished, each individual author may enforce these rights (as long
as the parties have not provided otherwise in a contractual
arrangement).

The enforcement of rights on a collection of works may be easier, since
the person under whose guidance and supervision the work as a whole has
been made has the power to institute legal proceedings against the other
parties.

If one has obtained a FOSS licence, one has become a licensee. The
licensee has a right to institute legal proceedings if he has obtained
the authority to do so from the author, or his successor in title
(Article 27a CA).

As there is a lot of uncertainty as to who legally has the right to
initiate proceedings, the Free Software Foundation has introduced the
Fiduciary License Agreement (“FLA”). The FLA intends to remove this
uncertainty by allowing authors to make the Free Software Foundation
their fiduciary in all legal matters.[^552]

### Procedures {#nl_procedures2}

The rightholder can initiate different legal proceedings in the
Netherlands to enforce his rights under the Copyright Act and/or the
Dutch Civil Code. For instance, the rightholder can initiate
interlocutory proceedings (“kort geding”) at short notice, in an attempt
to put a halt to the infringement, or the impending or potential
infringement of its copyright. Interlocutory proceedings can only be
initiated in relation to a matter of urgent interest, but a copyright
infringement — or a threatened or potential infringement — is usually
considered sufficiently urgent to justify such proceedings. A hearing
can take place within a few weeks and it is often possible to obtain an
injunction within just six to eight weeks. The judge in interlocutory
proceedings (“voorzieningenrechter”) will render a decision on the basis
of his preliminary assessment. Normally he will issue such an injunction
if he is satisfied, by preliminary assessment, that the copyright is
valid and infringed.

Interlocutory proceedings may also be initiated by the copyright owner
to request ancillary orders, such as a recall, a rectification, an
account of profits and an advance payment for the damages, but the
urgent need for such measures must be clearly explained by the copyright
owner.

The copyright owner also has the possibility of requesting permission
from the judge in interlocutory proceedings to conduct a seizure for the
surrender of infringing goods at the premises of the alleged infringers
(see: Article 28, paragraph 1 CA). The copyright owner can also request
permission for a conservatory seizure of *any* type of goods, not
necessarily the infringing goods, as a security for a monetary sum that
he is claiming from the infringer. The copyright owner also has the
possibility of requesting a seizure of goods for the preservation of
evidence, on the basis of Articles 843a and/or 1019b and 1019c
CCP.[^553] In such a case, the copyright owner must make it plausible
that the other party, who is not heard by the judge in interlocutory
proceedings, is infringing his copyright or that there is a serious
threat of this occurring; he must also demonstrate an interest in the
requested measures. After such a seizure for the preservation of
evidence, the copyright owner does not automatically gain access to the
results, but must put forward a specific claim for this access before
the court.

In very urgent matters, the copyright owner can request the judge in
interlocutory proceedings to render an “ex parte injunction” (Article
1019e CCP).[^554] This means that the (allegedly) infringing party is
not heard. Ex parte injunctions are preliminary and can be requested in
cases with an extraordinary urgent interest, especially if irreparable
harm will be caused and normal (interlocutory) proceedings cannot be
awaited (*periculum in mora*).[^555] It is necessary for the copyright
to be legal and valid at first sight (*prima facie fumus boni iuris*),
and for the infringement to be clear-cut actual and, at least, imminent.
In order for this to be seen as reasonable, the applicant should give
full and frank disclosure. The judge in interlocutory proceedings only
briefly assesses the request for an ex parte injunction on these
grounds. An ex parte injunction can be obtained within two to three
days. If the enforcement of an ex parte injunction is subsequently
lifted or if proceedings on the merits lead to a different outcome, the
enforcing party can be held liable for damages.[^556]

Interlocutory proceedings, as well as the ex parte injunctions and
seizures, should be promptly followed by proceedings on the merits, or
the related preliminary injunction will lapse. Moreover, definitive
remedies, such as declaratory judgments, revocation of copyrights,
rescissions of agreements and the payment of damages cannot be awarded
in interlocutory proceedings. For such remedies, the rightholder should
initiate proceedings on the merits. Of course, the rightholder can also
request an injunction or ancillary orders during proceedings on the
merits, such as a declaratory judgment, a recall of the infringing
products, rectification, information about the distribution channels, an
account of profits, destruction of the infringing goods and/or the
materials for the production of the infringing goods, publication of the
decision, the payment of damages or the surrender of profits and the
payment of reasonable legal costs (provided that the copyright owner
proves that he has an interest in such measures).

In intellectual property rights cases, the successful party in the
proceedings is awarded a payment from the other party of all the
reasonable costs that he incurred in taking the proceedings (Article
1019h CCP).

### Recommended literature {#_recommended_literature_4}

-   H. Franken (Ed.), Recht en computer, 3rd impression, Deventer:
    Kluwer 1997.

-   Recht en Informatietechnologie, SDU: Den Haag.

-   P.C. van Schelven & H. Struik, Softwarerecht, Deventer: Kluwer 1995.

-   J.H. Spoor, D.W.F. Verkade, D.J.G. Visser, Auteursrecht, naburige
    rechten en databankenrecht, Kluwer: Deventer 2005.

-   E.P.M. Thole, Software een “novum” in het vermogensrecht, Deventer:
    Kluwer 1991.

-   E. Thole, R. Scholten, W. Seinen (Eds.), Open Source Software — Een
    verkenning naar de juridische aspecten van open source software,
    NvvIR 2006.

-   L. Guibault, O. van Daalen, Unravelling the Myth around Open Source
    Licenses — An Analysis from a Dutch and European Law Perspective,
    ITeR series no. 8, The Hauge: TMC Asser Press 2006.

-   L.M.C.R. Guibault, Copyright Limitations and contracts. An analysis
    of the contractual overridability of the limitations on copyright,
    The Hague/London/Boston: Kluwer Law International 2002.

-   A.R. Bloembergen 1998, Rechshandeling en overeenkomst, Deventer:
    Kluwer 1998.

-   M. Berghuis, Informatielicenties — Een analyse van UCITA en de
    rechtspraktijk in Nederland en de Verenigde Staten, The Hague:
    SDU 2005.

-   W. Dammers and M. Weij, Aansprakelijkheid voor fouten in
    (open source) software, of toch niet? in H. Sleurink, J. Stedehouder
    and J.W. Broekema (Eds.) Open source jaarboek 2009-2010, Media
    Update Vakpublicaties: Gorredijk 2010.

-   T.E. Deurvorst, Schadevergoeding en winstafdracht bij inbreuk op
    intellectuele eigendomsrechten, Lelystad 1991.

-   W.F. Dammers, Examining Ex Parte in Rei Patenti, Wolf Legal
    Publishers: Nijmegen 2011.

-   A. Engelfriet, De Wet op internet, Ius Mentis B.V., Eindhoven: 2013.

-   A. Engelfriet and S. Biersteker, Software, Ius Mentis B.V.,
    Eindhoven: 2013.

Poland {#chap.poland}
======

author:\[Rychlicki,Tomasz\]

Introduction to software protection under Polish law {#sec_introductionpolish}
----------------------------------------------------

The legal framework regarding software protection in the Republic of
Poland comprises the Constitution of 2 April 1997, acts passed by
Parliament, ratified treaties, and regulations issued by the Prime
Minister or the Council of Ministers. As far as international treaties
and agreements relating to copyright protection of computer
programs/software are concerned, the Republic of Poland has
acceded[^557] to several international treaties which have the same
legal effect as the legislation directly established by Parliament.

Unsurprisingly, legal norms affording protection of software are
categorized in civil law as opposed to criminal law. However, the Polish
Criminal Code (hereinafter the CRC) provides for protection of computer
programs[^558]. Copyright protection of software is regulated in Poland
by the Act on Authors' Rights and Neighbouring Rights (hereinafter the
ARNR)[^559].

The ARNR is deemed *lex specialis* with regard to provisions of the
Civil Code[^560]. The Polish Codification Commission preparing the 1964
draft of the Civil Code (hereinafter the CC) did consider adding the new
law on copyright to the CC, but the pragmatic view that it was best not
to disturb the existing regulations of the separate law on copyright
prevailed. Another reason to regulate this area of law outside the CC is
that, although it focuses on private law matters, it also encompasses
the closely related areas of administrative and criminal law[^561].

The ARNR transposes Council Directive 91/250/EEC of 14 May 1991 on the
legal protection of computer programs[^562] into Polish national law
(hereinafter the Software Directive).

In cases where international agreements to which Poland is a party
provide for a higher level of protection than is envisaged under the
ARNR, the international convention prevails. This rule is in compliance
with the Polish Constitution, which provides that international treaties
are self-executing[^563]. The more beneficial rules under international
conventions apply not only to beneficiaries under the relevant
conventions, but also to works whose country of origin is Poland[^564].

### Copyright: Object of protection {#sec_poland_CopyrightObjectOfProtection}

Copyright is defined as any expression of creative activity having
individual character and manifested in any material form, regardless of
the value, intended purpose or manner of expression thereof (the
work)[^565]. Case law and the Polish legal doctrine share the view that
an immaterial work under copyright law should demonstrate all of the
following characteristics:

-   it must be the result of the activity of a person, i.e. the creator
    of the work, whereby manifestation of activity means every
    manifested result of action,

-   it must be a manifestation of creative activity,

-   it must have an individual character[^566].

The ARNR provides a non-exhaustive list of works that may be subject to
automatic copyright protection[^567] for which no formalities are
required. The ARNR does not require the use of copyright notices, but
such notices are very often used in order to identify protected works.
The Polish Supreme Court has repeatedly indicated that copyrighted work
can be of any kind, provided — in terms of form at least — it shows a
minimum degree of creativity[^568].

Polish copyright law provides no definition of a computer program or
computer software. Computer programs are eligible for protection as
literary works. The protection granted to a computer program should
extend to all related forms of expression, including design, production
and utilisation. The ideas and principles underlying any element of a
computer program, including those underlying its interfaces, are not
protected[^569].

The program interface is protected in the same way as other components
of a computer program. If it appears that information obtained through
decompilation of the interface does not allow for the development of a
substitute interface (for instance, to achieve interoperability with
other programs), then the conclusion must be that such interface is
“determined” and, therefore, it is not eligible for copyright protection
and cannot legally be transferred to another program[^570]. The Supreme
Administrative Court has ruled that whether a given work is
copyrightable is not determined by the will of the contracting parties,
but by the findings of fact. A computer program cannot be copyrighted
unless the activities of its creator have the characteristics of
originality and individuality[^571].

Authors/Beneficiaries {#sec_poland_authors}
---------------------

Copyright belongs to the creator, unless otherwise stated by law. The
creator should be that person whose name is clearly marked on the copies
of the work or whose authorship has in any other way been brought to the
notice of the public in connection with the disclosure of the work.

Insofar as the creator has not revealed his authorship, he should be
replaced in the exercise of his copyright by the producer or publisher,
and in their absence by the appropriate organization for the collective
administration of authors' rights[^572].

Joint creators should have joint ownership of copyright and their shares
are presumed equal. Each joint creator may demand to have the size of
the shares determined by a court of law in proportion to the individual
contributions of creative work. Each of the joint creators may exercise
the copyright in that part of the work created by him, provided said
part has intrinsic value, but without prejudice to the rights of the
other joint creators. Exercising copyright in the overall work requires
approval from all the creators. In the absence of such agreement, each
creator may seek resolution of the dispute in court[^573], which should
reach a decision taking the interests of all the joint creators into
consideration. Each of the joint creators may bring action claiming
violation of copyright in relation to the whole work. Sums won in such
action are awarded to the creators depending on their share of the
copyrighted work. The provisions on joint ownership[^574] apply
similarly to the economic rights of joint creators[^575].

Where the creators have assembled their separate works with a view to
joint distribution, each may demand permission from the other(s) to
distribute the entire work, except where there is a valid reason for
refusing such permission or where the contract between them provides
otherwise[^576].

The economic rights in a collective work, particularly those in an
encyclopaedia or periodical publication, should accrue to the producer
or editor, whereas the rights in the separate parts of the work that
have intrinsic value should accrue to the creators thereof. The right to
the title is deemed to belong to the producer or publisher[^577].

### Exclusive rights {#sec_poland_ExclusiveRights}

Copyright is deemed as an absolute right that protects the spiritual and
material interests of the creator connected with his/her work.
Traditionally, there are two groups of the so-called author’s rights:
personal rights and economic rights. The economic rights of a computer
program/software consist of:

-   the right to reproduce the program in its entirety or in part,
    either permanently or over a fixed period, by any means and in any
    form; where the installation/loading, display, running, transmission
    or storage of a computer program calls for such reproduction, those
    acts should not require the consent of the owner of rights;

-   the right to translate, adapt, arrange or in any other way transform
    a computer program, without prejudice to the rights of the person
    who makes such modifications;

-   the right to distribute the original or copies of a computer program
    to the public, including rental or lending. The first sale of a copy
    of the program made by the owner of the rights or with his consent
    cause the right of distribution for that particular copy to lapse,
    without prejudice to the right to monitor any subsequent rental or
    lending of a computer program or of copies thereof[^578].

### Exemptions to exclusive rights {#sec_poland_ExemptionsToExclusiveRights}

Exceptions to the author’s monopoly are usually accepted because of the
public interest in free access to creativity[^579]. The provisions on
exercising copyrights that apply to computer programs are very
restrictive, compared to those applying to other objects of copyright
protection. The following acts should not require authorization from the
owner of rights:

-   the making of a backup or reserve copy, provided such copy is
    necessary for using a computer program; unless otherwise provided in
    the contract, the copy may not be used at the same time as the
    computer program;

-   analysis and study, as well as experimentation with the operation of
    a computer program by the person authorized under the contract to
    make use of a copy of the program, in order to ascertain its
    underlying ideas and principles, provided the person concerned
    performs the above acts in conjunction with the
    installation/loading, display, running, transmission or storage of
    the computer program;

-   reproduction of the code or translation of its form where that is
    essential for obtaining the information required for achieving
    interoperability between an independently created computer program
    and other programs, provided that the following conditions are
    met: (a) the acts are performed by the licensee, or by another
    person enjoying the right to use the copy of a program, or, by a
    person authorized to do so on their behalf; (b) the information
    required for achieving interoperability is not already easily and
    rapidly accessible to the persons referred to under (a); (c) the
    acts are confined to those parts of the original program that are
    required for achieving interoperability.

-   The information mentioned above may not be:

    -   used for purposes other than for achieving the interoperability
        of the independently created computer program,

    -   communicated to other persons, except where essential to the
        interoperability of the independently created computer program,

    -   used for the development, production or marketing of a computer
        program of essentially similar form, or for any other act in
        violation of the copyright.

Contractual provisions contrary to these exceptions are deemed null and
void. The ARNR makes no distinction between physical distribution and
online distribution of computer programs. All the above-mentioned
exemptions apply to all types/kinds of software, irrespective of the way
in which it is received.

+ Computer software is excluded from so-called “personal use”
provisions, which grant the user the right to a copyrighted work without
having to obtain consent from the copyright holder[^580].

### Moral rights {#sec_poland_MoralRights}

According to the provisions of the Polish law, personal rights or moral
rights protect the bond between the creator and the work. This bond is
not limited in time or susceptible to renunciation or assignment, in
particular with regard to the creator’s right to claim authorship of the
work and to make the work appear under his name or pseudonym, or to make
his anonymous work available to the public. However, the right to make
changes to the work (to supervise one’s work), the right to safeguard
the content and form of the work and its proper use, and the right to
control the work’s manner of use do not apply to computer
programs[^581].

### Term of protection {#sec_poland_TermOfProtection}

The economic rights lapse on expiry of a period of seventy years,
calculated:

\(1) from the death of the creator, and in the case of works of joint
authorship from the death of the last surviving joint creator,

\(2) from the date of first publication if the creator is not known, and
if the work has not been published, from its production in material
form, unless — before that period expires — the name of the creator has
been revealed with his consent,

\(3) from the date of first publication if the economic rights belong by
operation of law to a person other than the creator himself, and if the
work has not been published, from its production in material form[^582].

### Copyright assignment {#sec_poland_CopyrightAssignment}

An employer whose employee has created a work under an employment
contract acquires, on accepting the work, the economic rights of the
work developed during employment, as contractually agreed by the
parties.

If, within two years of acceptance of the work, the employer does not
proceed with disclosure of the work as contractually agreed, the creator
may grant the employer in writing a sufficient period of time for such
disclosure. If that period expires to no avail, the rights acquired by
the employer revert to the creator and the material object in which the
work is embodied becomes the creator’s property, unless the contract
provides otherwise. The parties are free to contractually agree on their
own disclosure period.

Unless otherwise provided in the contract, the economic rights in a
computer program created by an employee during his or her employment
belong to the employer[^583]. This provision has specific nature and
should not therefore be interpreted broadly. For instance, if computer
software is created under a contract similar to an employment agreement
(or any other contract such as a commission or work for hire), all
copyrights remain with the creator, unless the contract stipulates
otherwise.

Unprotected software and public domain software {#sec_poland_UnprotectedSoftware}
-----------------------------------------------

As set forth above, only software that is original enjoys copyright
protection. Non-original software is not eligible for copyright
protection.

Analysis of FOSS under Polish law {#sec_poland_AnalysisOfFOSSUnderPolishLaw}
---------------------------------

### The issue of free documentation {#sec_poland_TheIssueOfFreeDocumentation}

Polish law has not yet extensively handled the issue of software
documentation not released under a free licence. Under German law for
instance, as has been mentioned by legal commentators, provisions may be
invoked under which an author acting in good faith may not refuse to
allow the processing of documentation. However, there is a lack of
support for this interpretation in Polish law, due to exclusion of the
rule which states that, without the consent of the creator, a legal
successor may not make any alterations to the work except where they are
dictated by an obvious necessity and where the creator has no valid
reason to object to them[^584]. This should apply by analogy to works in
which the economic rights have expired[^585].

### The laws applicable to the distribution of copyrighted works {#sec_poland_TheLawsApplicableToTheDistributioOfCopyrightedWorks}

While analyzing the specific provisions of the GPL governing the
distribution of copyrighted works, the issue of the waiver of rights
arises. Polish copyright law has adopted the concept of dualistic
author’s rights (i.e. personal and economic rights), which includes the
copying right. The waiver would be a consequence of a unilateral legal
act that is communicated to the public by an author/creator. In the case
of the GPL, the author/creator makes his software available under the
GPL, thereby waiving all his rights in that particular work.
Concurrently, Polish law contains provisions that conflict with the
concept of waiving rights. Hence the conclusion is as follows: it is
impossible to waive the right to remuneration[^586] (among the author’s
economic rights) and then waive all other economic rights. There is also
a prohibition on transferring economic rights for types of exploitation
not known at the time the contract is concluded; another argument that
economic rights cannot be waived under the Polish copyright law[^587].

### Concept of civil partnership {#sec_poland_ConceptOfCivilPartnership}

The legal nature of joint activity performed by people who are
developing open source software has also been analyzed and treated as a
unique form of civil partnership[^588]. This follows from the conclusion
that individuals who contribute to the development of open source
software work together as a quasi-civil partnership[^589]. One of the
requirements is that the partners undertake to achieve a joint economic
purpose[^590]. However, as has been observed, the contractual obligation
to support the goal of a civil partnership[^591] does not arise by
merely downloading open source software from the Internet. Moreover, no
legal obligations are incurred by altering software for personal
use[^592].

### Contract of donation or a sales contract {#sec_poland_ContractOfDonationOrASalesContract}

Ways of receiving open source software have been analyzed in order to
determine whether it should be categorized as a donation or a sales
contract, or whether it is an *ex-parte* action[^593]. Undoubtedly,
computer programs/ software are deemed economic assets of a given value
and are treated as a different kind of “goods”[^594]. The nature of a
program allows it to be regarded as the autonomous subject-matter of the
contract/licence[^595]. So one must distinguish between the act of
receiving software, and the licensing/contractual issues that focus on
actual use of the software. First, a distinction is made between the act
of acquiring a software program and the legal implications of such act
(gaining possession) on the one hand, and the acquisition of a wide
range of rights (of use/distribution, etc.) in the software under a
licence agreement on the other[^596].

Attention has to be drawn to two distinct steps: (i) acquisition of the
actual program, and (ii) acquisition of the relevant rights. The first
step may take place by legally downloading the open source software,
permitting limited use of the software as indicated by the provisions of
Article 75(1) and (2) of the ARNR. [^597]. This is a *sui generis*,
relatively obligatory, statutory licence. To date, the terms and
conditions of open source software licences are not part of the legal
relationship between an authorized user and the proprietor of the
software.\]. A licence agreement applies later on, when the user starts
to use the software[^598]. The separate nature and chronological order
of these agreements are in relation to the user’s familiarization with
the provisions of the agreement[^599].

The sole authorization to download the program can be characterized as a
donation of property (the property of the proprietor of the program). It
has been discussed whether in such cases an independent contract has to
be concluded for the acquisition of the program, which is separate from
the licence agreement and precedes it, and whether such an agreement
should be treated as a donation agreement[^600]. There is a statutory
requirement that in order to maintain its validity, a donation agreement
has to be issued in notarized form as a deed documenting the will of the
donor[^601]. However, the opposite may also be argued: a donation
agreement is valid without notarization if the promised performance has
been rendered[^602]. Most convincing is the argument pointing out that a
donation is made at the expense of a donor — namely the permanent
depletion of the substance of the donor’s property. This is not the case
as far as free software is concerned. The logical conclusion is that an
anonymous contract is concluded between the proprietor of the software
and the user who downloads/acquires it[^603]. It should be emphasized
that under Polish law, free transfer of ownership of a tangible medium
containing open source software (DVD, CD — the so-called *corpus
mechanicum*) is without a doubt a contract of donation. The provisions
of Article 75(1) and (2)[^604] of the ARNR govern specific forms of
software exploitation, and so it is unnecessary to issue a software
licence in the shape of either an agreement or a unilateral legal act.

### The specificity of FOSS licences under Polish law {#sec_poland_TheSpecificityOfFOSSLicencesUnderPolishLaw}

#### Software as a subject of FOSS licences {#_software_as_a_subject_of_foss_licences}

After some deliberation, Polish legal doctrine acknowledged that the
existence of open source licences is based on the assumption that this
kind of software uses copyright protection[^605]. This is nothing new,
because even though Stallman himself once strongly criticized the notion
of intellectual property (IP), he also supports the main principles of
copyright law[^606]. It is widely acknowledged that all GPL licences are
built upon the framework of copyright law. As was once said, “to stay
free, software must be copyrighted and licensed”[^607] — assuming that
the program can be copyright protected i.e. that it is a creative work
of individual nature as defined by Polish law. It should also be
mentioned that there is no presumption that the results of actions/works
are copyright protected, unless counter-proof is furnished[^608].

#### The owner/licensor/employee as a subject of FOSS licences {#_the_owner_licensor_employee_as_a_subject_of_foss_licences}

The basic issue is to determine who is entitled to the economic author’s
rights (right to copy etc.) as the primary copyright owner, and whether
these rights can also be enjoyed by successors in title[^609]. Copyright
is vested in the creator/author (creators/authors) at the time of the
creation of the work — this principle is transferred to computer
programs. The situation is different with employees' works — copyright
is passed to the employer *ex lege*.

An employer using open source software to which one of his employees has
made changes should make the altered software available on the same
terms on which the original software was distributed and licensed[^610].

In this case, the issue of payment for making changes to the program is
not recognized as a fee for the licence or for the transfer of rights in
the software, but only as remuneration for the employee’s work[^611].

Software copyright cannot be encumbered or restricted if a program is
distributed/published under an open source licence by an authorized
person (successor) at the time when such person holds all the rights in
the wake of general succession.

#### Legal issues on co-authorship {#_legal_issues_on_co_authorship}

The situation regarding ownership of the program is more complicated
when an undefined number of persons is involved in working on the
program. The following questions may arise: who is the author, and how
does someone come to be regarded as the author? This is certainly the
outcome of the bazaar approach in developing FOSS. The concept of
co-authorship was adopted with the in casu legal construction of
“combined work”[^612]. However, this situation poses certain problems
relating to, *inter alia*, the exercising of the copyright in the whole
work, because that should require the agreement of all the joint
creators. In the absence of such agreement, each joint creator may seek
settlement of the dispute by a court, which should rule taking the
interests of all the joint creators into consideration[^613]. In any
such case the principle of a majority vote cannot be applied, and the
only effective solution to this problem may be a Fiduciary Licence
Agreement[^614].

#### Minors and FOSS {#_minors_and_foss}

FOSS is and should be used by minors[^615] but there are some important
issues to be considered. The Civil Code requires the consent of a
guardian to acts done by a minor[^616]. As a rule the licensee may be a
minor and the minor may also accept a donation, but without creating any
encumbrance on the minor’s part[^617]. The question arises however as to
whether the minor can effectively participate in the development of open
source software, and whether under Polish law the distribution of FOSS
should be limited to adults only[^618]. Unfortunately, Polish law and
legal doctrine have failed to make a more thorough analysis of the legal
issues relating to the participation of minors in using and developing
free software. Allowing a minor to exercise the privileges of an open
source licence is justified by the concept that permission from his or
her statutory representative has been issued implicitly (by
implication), a general assumption in the sphere of legal actions
relating to the use of free software[^619]. This issue is also very
interesting in view of the fact that work or other paid activities may
only be performed by a child under the age of 16 for the benefit of an
entity that is involved in cultural, artistic, sporting or advertising
activities, and only with the prior consent of his or her statutory
representative or guardian as well as permission from the competent
labour inspectorate[^620].

#### Concluding individual FOSS licences under Polish law {#_concluding_individual_foss_licences_under_polish_law}

An agreement is concluded when an offer[^621] is submitted and then
accepted[^622]. Such an agreement has many unusual characteristics[^623]
indicated by the manner in which the contract is concluded. A statement
is made offering non-exclusive rights to every user, so an offer is
directed to all (*ad incertas personas*) to use the work (the
reproduction, distribution, alteration rights, etc.). It is considered a
definite offer to conclude a contract when the author or other entitled
party makes software available under similar conditions and enables the
downloading of a program. This is not considered a typical invitation to
call for bids (*invitatio ad offerendum*[^624]). The offer to conclude
an agreement may also be submitted in other circumstances, i.e. if there
is a third party between the offeror (licensor) and offeree (licensee),
and if such third party is deemed a messenger or representative who
provides information about the contract offer[^625].

The individual contract is not concluded on commencing use of the
software, but when distribution of the program begins. The user accepts
the offer by performing such actions as modification or
distribution[^626]. It is not important for the conclusion of the
contract that the licensor has to receive an approval message[^627].
This is implicit conclusion of a contract performed. There is also the
issue of how to assess the nature of distribution of a computer program
that is based on an order placed by a potential user by e-mail. It is
assumed that this constitutes the conclusion of an agreement to transfer
intangible rights that has the characteristics of a contract of donation
or an innominate contract, to which the statutory regulations pertaining
to donation agreements should apply. Article 75(1) of the ARNR regulates
the permissible exploitation of the program.

#### The characteristics of an individual open source licence {#_the_characteristics_of_an_individual_open_source_licence}

This is an individual non-exclusive licensing agreement[^628]. The
rights to use open source software are provided on a resolutive
condition[^629].

#### The scope of rights/content of FOSS licences under Polish law {#_the_scope_of_rights_content_of_foss_licences_under_polish_law}

It has been discussed whether the scope of rights under the GPL2 can be
extended to the lease right that is not explicitly mentioned in this
licence. The popular opinion issued by J. Marly[^630] has also been
accepted by Polish legal commentators[^631]. As regards the distribution
right, it has been agreed that this right may be exercised under a
donation contract or a special form of innominate contract, but
definitely not under a sales agreement[^632].

#### Obligations {#_obligations}

The program’s author or developer is required to grant non-exclusive
rights free of charge. There is a conflict here with the copyright of
works created during an employment relationship, because under statutory
regulations the entitled party is *ex lege* the employer. As already
mentioned, the issue of copyleft also conflicts with the provisions of
the Civil Code concerning minors[^633].

#### Termination of license contract {#_termination_of_license_contract}

The licence expires *ex nunc* if the licensee violates the conditions of
Section 4 of the GPLv2. This means that continued use/exploitation
constitutes a violation of absolute copyright laws. However, this does
not grant entitlement to assert the claims provided for such cases when
Article 75 of the ARNR is applied. The problem of the principle of
exhaustion of rights arises. If it is assumed that a licence agreement
is not disposable, then the provisions of Article 365\$\^1\$ of the CC
should be applied[^634]. However, under Polish law the nullity of a
legal action involving the termination or rescission of a licence
agreement has to be considered, taking into account the rules on open
source movement, if a licence agreement is terminated or a unilateral
licence is withdrawn without the provisions of such agreement having
been infringed by the licensee. This would be a declaration of will that
is clearly contrary to the rules of social coexistence as defined in
Article 58 § 2 of the CC[^635]. If this interpretation is not feasible,
an alternative would be to invoke the abuse of rights by the holder of
the open source software[^636].

#### Distribution of open source software by 3rd parties {#_distribution_of_open_source_software_by_3rd_parties}

The messenger[^637] who passes on an offer, as defined in the GPL and
submitted by the author or producer of open source software, is regarded
in Polish law as being the distributor of the open source software. In
any such case, the offer is accepted *per facta concludentia* (both
parties have voluntarily started to render their contractual
performance) by starting the exploitation of the program[^638]. A legal
relationship is then brought about between the author/entitled person
and a third party (distributor). The parties may be bound by any of the
following contractual relationships: a licence agreement for
reproduction, distribution and circulation; a sub-licence agreement; a
sales contract; a consignment agreement; or an agency contract[^639].

#### Breach of the conditions of FOSS licence {#_breach_of_the_conditions_of_foss_licence}

Any breach of the licence automatically renders it void. However,
termination in this manner will not affect the interests and rights of
third parties if they acquired the right to use the software from the
party who violated the licence. The question arises as to whether the
party who violates the GPL also loses the status of “the lawful user of
the program”. i.e. the party entitled to use a copy of the program,
meaning that it is not allowed to exercise the rights conferred by
Article 75 of the ANRN. After obtaining a program released under an open
source licence/GPL, this applies both to the stage following conclusion
of the licence agreement and to the stage preceding conclusion of an
individual contract under the provisions of the GPL. Any violation of
the GPL beyond the permitted limits effectively terminates not only the
agreement itself, but also the ability to use the program[^640].

The conditions of the GPL are also breached if software is installed on
embedded systems where the source code is not made available/shared,
and/or if a written offer to supply the software has not been
released/submitted[^641]. If an open source licence agreement is
breached, all the claims relating to copyright infringement may be
asserted. The entitled party whose economic rights have been infringed,
may demand that the person infringing these rights:[^642]

1\) put an end to the infringement;

2\) eliminate the consequences of the infringement;

3\) compensate the losses:

a\) either on the basis of general principles[^643], or

b\) by paying a sum of money equal to twice — or, if the infringement is
culpable, three times — the equitable remuneration, which at the time of
enforcement would be due to the entitled party in return for granting
permission to use the work;

4\) surrender any benefits received.

Regardless of the aforementioned claims, the entitled party may demand:

1\) a one-off or repeated press announcement of appropriate content and
form, or (part) publication of the court ruling in the case at issue, in
accordance with the court’s specifications;,

2\) payment by the infringer of an appropriate sum of money, not less
than twice the amount of the benefit attained by the infringing party,
to the Fund for the Promotion of Artistic Creation, if the infringement
is culpable and occurred during business activities carried out in the
infringer’s own name or for third-party account.

Each of the joint creators may bring action claiming violation of
copyright in relation to the whole work[^644]. The FSFE’s Fiduciary
Licence Agreement is a perfect solution for all problems connected with
co-authorship and joint ownership[^645].

#### FOSS licences and private international law {#_foss_licences_and_private_international_law}

The provisions of standard open source licence are within the limits and
scope of contractual freedom as adopted in civil law in Article
353\$\^1\$ of the CC[^646]. In accordance with the provisions of the
Polish Act of 12 November 1965 on Private International Law (hereinafter
the PIL), in the absence of the choice of law, an obligation is subject
to the law of the state in which the contract was concluded[^647].

Interpreting the provisions of Article 7 of the PIL, it may be argued
that Polish law applies to contracts/agreements permitting use of open
source software in Poland[^648]. It may also be assumed that a
contract/agreement on using open source software is brought about on
saving the software to the computer memory, and in conjunction with the
provisions of Article 70 § 2 of the CC[^649] the conclusion is that the
location of the computer determines the location of the conclusion of
the contract[^650].

#### FOSS licences and consumer law {#_foss_licences_and_consumer_law}

The GPL has been the subject of analysis from the point of view of
Polish consumer law. The first important issue to be raised is the fact
that only the English-language version is legally binding[^651]. This
situation makes the GPL subject to application of the provisions of the
Act of 7 October 1999 on the Polish Language[^652]. According to Article
7 of the Act, all contracts to which a Polish entity is a party and
which are to be executed on Polish territory must be written in Polish.
Although versions of such contracts may also exist in a foreign
language, the Polish version of the contract prevails for interpretation
purposes, unless the parties expressly stipulate otherwise in the
contract. The Act explicitly forbids using a foreign language version of
a contract to provide evidence of the contract’s existence. This means
that in a dispute before a Polish court, parties to a contract executed
only in a foreign language are denied the right to furnish evidence to
prove the existence of the contract. For goods and services, all product
manuals and specifications, terms and conditions of warranties,
invoices, bills and receipts must be in Polish. The Act requires the
names of merchandise to be in Polish, although individually designated
names, brands and trademarks — despite their foreign wording — do not
have to have Polish equivalents. The Act requires that offers,
advertisements and descriptions of merchandise and services which are in
a foreign language be accompanied by a Polish translation[^653]. If the
obligations laid down in Article 7 of the Act are violated, the relevant
provisions of Article 74 § 1 sentence 1 and 74 § 2 of the CC
apply[^654].

This does not imply the invalidity of such an agreement, but it has an
effect in the sphere of evidence — *ad solemnitatem*[^655]. The
documents referred to in Article 7 also relate to standard contract
forms, and that is what the GPL and other open source model licences
undoubtedly are[^656].

The obligation to use the Polish language cannot be eliminated by
indicating that the applicable law is other than Polish law[^657].
Polish courts are obliged to apply the provisions of Articles 7 and 8 of
the Act on Polish language[^658]. Thus a Polish court is bound to settle
any dispute arising from the contractual provisions by invoking the
restriction pursuant to Articles 7 and 8, which will always be applied
even if under Polish Private International Law the law governing the
standard contract form is foreign law[^659].

The issue of concluding an open source licence/contract has been
analyzed from the point of view of the protection of consumer interests,
based on the provisions of Act of 27 July 2002 on Specific Terms and
Conditions of Consumer Sale and Amendments to the Civil Code[^660].
However, the application of these provisions has been questioned, due to
the fact that this Act should be applied to the sale — in the context of
an enterprise’s business activities — of a movable chattel/tangible
asset to a natural person who purchases the item for a purpose other
than carrying out professional work or business (consumer goods)[^661].

Another aspect of consumer law is the analysis of contractual provisions
of open source licences in terms of distance dealing, and the provisions
of the Act of 2 March 2000 on the Protection of Consumer Rights and
Liability for Damage Caused by a Dangerous Product (hereinafter the
PRCLL)[^662]. Such contracts are concluded in a situation where the two
parties are not simultaneously present in one place, and methods or
means of distance communication — including electronic means of
communication within the meaning of Article 2 pt. 5 of the Polish Act of
18 July 2002 on Providing Services by Electronic Means — PSEM — (in
Polish: ustawa o świadczeniu usług drogą elektroniczną)[^663] — are used
to conclude the agreement. Downloading a program from the Internet that
is distributed under the GPL satisfies the conditions of a
contract/agreement/licence concluded at a distance. The application of
these laws is limited due to the fact that the consumer is acting as
licensee, whilst the other party is the entrepreneur/professional entity
doing business operations. The burden of proof that an agreement has
been concluded at a distance lies with the consumer.

+ In addition, if the open source licence/agreement/contract is
concluded at a distance and is subject to regulations laid down in the
PRCLL, other legal standards provided in this Act may be applicable. The
rights of the consumer may not be excluded or limited under a contract,
even where foreign law has been chosen[^664]. A consumer who concludes a
distance contract may withdraw from it without giving reasons, by
issuing a written statement to that effect within a period of ten days
after conclusion of the contract[^665]. This right is not conceded in
the provisions of the GPL, but this does not have any serious legal
implications[^666].

#### FOSS licences and model contracts {#_foss_licences_and_model_contracts}

The general terms of licence agreements on open source software, such as
the GPL, satisfy the conditions for applying the provision laid down in
Article 384 of the CC[^667] and are deemed “previously formulated
contractual terms”. There is no special treatment for general licence
terms drawn up as standard contracts with international scope[^668]. The
provisions of Articles 384-3854 of the CC are applied regardless of the
nature of the contract, and no matter whether the contract/agreement is
paid or free of charge.

Polish law also distinguishes recognition of a standard contract from
the question of its approval and inclusion in the wording of an
individual agreement on using a software program. This is not precluded
by the fact that the standard contract is drawn up in English[^669]. The
provisions of Article 385 §2 of the CC require only that the standard
contract be formulated explicitly and clearly.

Polish legal doctrine favours liberal and flexible interpretation of the
term “delivery/service” of a standard contract following its conclusion,
under provisions laid down in Article 384 §1 of the CC in conjunction
with Article 384 §4 of the CC. The provisions of a standard contract are
implemented in an individual agreement at the time of its
conclusion[^670].

However, general acknowledgement that the terms of the GPL effectively
apply in Poland, does not rule out doubts and questions regarding the
effectiveness of certain provisions of the GPL[^671]. It has also been
noted that the abusive nature of these provisions is subject to specific
presumption[^672].

Tax law {#sec_poland_taxlaw}
-------

The Polish tax system is divided mainly into tax on earnings and tax on
turnover[^673].

### Tax on legal entities and private income {#sec_poland_TaxOnLegalEntitiesAndPrivateIncome}

The Polish Undersecretary of State has issued an opinion[^674] regarding
tax consequences associated with the use of free software programs. The
circular was addressed to the directors of all tax offices and chambers
in order to ensure uniform application of the law under Article 14 § 1
no. 2 of the Tax Code and convey an explanation of Article 12(1) no. 2
of the Polish Act of 15 February 1992 on Legal Entities' Income Tax
(hereinafter the LEIT)[^675].

The opinion stated that in the case of rights obtained free of charge,
income is determined on the basis of prices used in market sales of
similar rights, in particular in terms of their condition and degree of
use and the time and place of such use. Tax law provisions establishing
the value of taxable income for performance received gratuitously do not
foresee a situation where such performance is free for all stakeholders.
Article 12(6) of the LEIT covers cases where the value of gratuitous
performance can be compared to other paid performance by the taxpayer.
The value of “comparable” performance of a given kind — in this case, of
free software that is available to all on an equal
(free-of-charge/gratuitous) basis — cannot be determined, and so there
is no basis for ascertaining earnings. If certain performance (including
the transfer of rights) is inherently free-of-charge to all taxpayers,
and not an individual case applying to a single entity, establishing
taxable income from such performance is not permitted pursuant to
Article 12(1)(ii) of the LEIT. This does not mean, however, that in
assessing the possible tax consequences associated with the use of such
software, there is no need to examine all the circumstances connected
with it. Each case therefore requires individual analysis. This
explanation of the tax consequences associated with using free software
applies to individuals engaged in non-agricultural business operations
who are liable to income tax[^676].

### Tax on civil law transactions {#sec_poland_TaxOnCivilLawTransactions}

The Tax Office in Tarnowskie Góry[^677] has ruled that the unconditional
free sharing of a computer program with unlimited recipients is not a
civil law act, and that donations sent to its creators by users of the
program are not a form of payment for its use. There is therefore no
legal relationship between the creators of the program and its users,
and no rights are transferred by the creator to the user, and so this
form of activity is not liable to tax on civil law transactions[^678].

### Tax on goods and services (VAT) {#sec_poland_vat}

The Tax Office in Chorzów[^679] has ruled that publishing a computer
program free of charge in the Internet, enabling it to be used by
anyone, is not necessarily based on any legal title incurring the
obligation to provide service and demand payment, and that the amount of
donations does not depend on the actual service provided, and so this
act is not deemed performance for remuneration. Furthermore, the Office
has ruled that there is no reason to believe that such actions are
services provided free-of-charge, and so they are not subject to tax on
goods and services[^680].

The above-mentioned position of the Polish tax authorities is
undoubtedly beneficial to those involved in the production and use of
free software. In principle, it also includes closed source software,
because that primarily concerns software that is distributed “free of
charge” and not the rights granted to users. Of course, it must be
remembered that interpretations by the tax authorities do not apply
universally and are not binding: they are merely issued with regard to a
specific taxpayer and the circumstances relating to that taxpayer[^681].

FOSS and legal issues of open standards {#sec_poland_legalissues}
---------------------------------------

Polish administrative courts have ruled that requests concerning access
to public information relating to open standards may be excluded,
because protection of secrecy (other than state secrets) is a matter for
the civil courts and not subject to administrative jurisdiction[^682].
The civil courts have held that in accordance with the obligation to
disclose public information laid down in Article 13 of the Act on the
Informatization of Activities Undertaken by Entities Fulfilling Public
Tasks[^683], the President of the Social Insurance Institution
(hereinafter the ZUS, in Polish: Zakład Ubezpieczeń Społecznych) has to
disclose public information concerning the technical specifications of
the KSI MAIL format that is used in Płatnik software[^684].

FOSS cases in Poland {#sec_poland_FOSSCasesInPoland}
--------------------

No cases have been reported so far (April 2014).

Legal procedures {#sec_poland_LegalProcedures}
----------------

Copyright holders in the Republic of Poland may protect their rights in
civil and criminal proceedings. Moreover, they may also resort to
procedure before the customs authorities. The Republic of Poland is not
a common law country and the courts are not bound by the decisions of
other courts. However, Polish judges tend to recognize widely the
decisions and verdicts of the Polish Courts of Appeal and the Polish
Supreme Court. Only rulings by the Supreme Court that are issued as a
legal norm are universally binding. The decisions of foreign bodies such
as the General Court and Court of Justice of the EU may be recognized
only as so-called “persuasive precedents”.

Action for infringement of copyright is brought before a District Court
in the first instance. There are no special courts which have exclusive
jurisdiction for resolving copyright disputes, except for matters
relating to the criminal prosecution of copyright infringement. These
cases are brought before the regional courts located in cities where
particular district courts are also seated. The litigation costs depend
on the amount in dispute.

Protection of databases {#sec_poland_ProtectionOfDatabases}
-----------------------

Poland has also adopted *sui generis* protection for databases in a
separate law, entitled the Act on Protection of Databases (hereinafter
the APD)[^685]. The Polish Supreme Court has held[^686] that acquiring
an electronic database and selling it to customers under a different
name is a tortious act of unfair competition.[^687]

### Recommended literature {#_recommended_literature_5}

-   J. Barta, R. Markiewicz, Oprogramowanie open source, w
    świetle prawa. Między własnością a wolnością, Zakamycze,
    Kraków 2005.

-   K. Siewicz, Towards an Improved Regulatory Framework of Free
    software, Protecting user freedoms in a world of software
    communities and eGovernments, Universiteit Leiden, EM Meijers
    Instituut voor RechtswetenschappelijkOnderzoek 2010.

#### Relevant legislation {#_relevant_legislation}

-   The Civil Code of 23 April 1964, Journal of Laws No. 16, item 93,
    with subsequent amendments.

-   The Act on Authors Rights and Neighbouring Rights of 4 February
    1994, published in Journal of Laws No. 24, item 83, consolidated
    text of 16 May 2006, Journal of Laws No. 90, item 631 with
    subsequent amendments.

-   The Act on Specific Terms and Conditions of Consumer Sale and
    Amendments to the Civil Code.

-   The Act of 2 March 2000 on the Protection of Certain Consumer Rights
    and on the Liability for Damage Caused by a Dangerous Product.

-   The Civil Proceedings Code of 17 November 1964, Journal of Laws No
    43, item 296, with subsequent amendments.

-   The Criminal Proceedings Code of 6 June 1997, Journal of Laws No 89,
    item 555, with subsequent amendments.

Portugal {#chap.portugal}
========

author:\[Quintais LL.M.,João Pedro\] author:\[Ramalho LL.M.,Ana B.\]

Introduction to software protection under Portuguese law {#_introduction_to_software_protection_under_portuguese_law}
--------------------------------------------------------

### Body of law {#_body_of_law_3}

In Portugal, software is protected by copyright under the Software
Act[^688], which implements the Software Directive.[^689] Unlike the
majority of European Member States, the Portuguese legislator chose to
implement the Software Directive through a separate legislative measure,
instead of incorporating it into the Portuguese Copyright Act
(hereinafter, the “PCA”).[^690]

According to the preamble of the Software Act, the reason for using this
legislative technique is the difference between the core concepts of
software protection and common copyright protection for other types of
works.[^691] This does not mean, however, that provisions of the PCA
will not apply to software — being the general law in the field of
copyright, the PCA will be fully applicable where the Software Act does
not provide otherwise. Still, since the Software Act is lex specialis
vis-à-vis the PCA, it shall prevail where its provisions are different
from the PCA, even if the application of the latter is not expressly set
aside.

It has been noted by several commentators that the Software Act deviates
significantly from the Software Directive it seeks to implement.[^692]
The following sections will analyze the specific relevant provisions of
the Software Act, while pointing out its disparities in relation to the
Software Directive.

### Object of protection {#_object_of_protection_2}

According to Article 1(2) of the Software Act, computer programs[^693]
that are creative will receive analogous protection to the one granted
to literary works. Differently from the Software Directive, computer
programs are not protected as literary works, but rather they are
granted an analogous protection.

The Software Act also departs from the Software Directive in relation to
the creativity requirement. The Directive mandates that a computer
program be protected if it is “original in the sense that it is the
author’s own intellectual creation.” Some authors have held that
creativity and originality are not substantially different for purposes
of a computer program qualifying for copyright protection.[^694] In any
case, given the principle of harmonious interpretation, which requires
national law to be interpreted in light of directives, it seems that in
practice the semantic differences will not be relevant.[^695]

The requirement is in line with the general provisions of the PCA, and
in particular with its Article 1(1), which defines a work as an
intellectual creation — and therefore as an expression of
creativity.[^696] Neither the Software Act nor the PCA, however, define
the concepts of “intellectual creation” or “creativity.” Legal doctrine,
on the other hand, highlights that an assessment of “creativity” does
not imply a judgment of merit of the work.[^697] Rather, the creativity
requirement is linked to the author’s individuality or
personality.[^698] It follows that the author must have creative
choices; if there is only one or few ways of expression of a computer
program due to technical constraints (e.g., programming language), the
protection threshold will not be met.[^699]

### Authors/Beneficiaries {#_authors_beneficiaries}

Article 3(1) of the Software Act establishes that the general rules on
copyright authorship and ownership (Articles 11 to 26 of the PCA) apply
to computer programs. These are, e.g., the prohibition of formalities as
a requirement for protection (Article 12 of the PCA); the ownership of
copyright in case of subsidized works (Article 13 of the PCA); or the
definition and regime of joint works (Articles 16-18 of the PCA),
collective works (Articles 16 and 19 PCA), and composite works (Article
20 of the PCA).

Nevertheless, the following paragraphs of the provision set forth
specific rules for computer programs.

Firstly, the computer program created within a company shall be deemed
to be a collective work.[^700] Following the rules of the PCA, the
rights are thus vested in the person (natural or legal) who organized
and managed the process of creating the computer program.[^701] Such
person will be the one under whose name the program is released.
However, if it is possible to identify separately the personal input of
any collaborator, the regime of joint works shall apply to that specific
part. As a result, according to Article 18 of the PCA, the individual
author of that part is entitled to exercise his rights in relation to
his particular work.

It is in addition noteworthy that this qualification is a rebuttable
legal presumption. Therefore, it is possible that some computer programs
are considered to be joint works — namely, if they are divulged or
published under the name of some or all of its creators.[^702] Should
that be the case, the rights to the program will belong to all
co-authors jointly and will be regulated by rules on co-ownership as
provided by the Civil Code.[^703] It follows therefrom that the rights
to the computer program can be exercised by either of its co-authors, so
long as the program is used for its intended purposes and the other
co-authors are not prevented from exercising their rights too.[^704]
Still, despite this common exercise of rights, each individual author is
entitled to exercise his rights to his part of the program, if his
creative input is identifiable.[^705]

Moreover, the computer program can also be considered a derivative or a
composite work. The former results from a transformation (e.g.,
arrangement or translation) of a pre-existing work,[^706] while the
latter incorporates the whole or part of a pre-existing work.[^707] Both
require an authorization from the copyright owner of the previous work,
but do not involve his participation or collaboration.[^708]
Consequently, the author of the composite or derivative work is the
holder of the rights alone, without prejudice, however, to the rights of
the copyright owner in the pre-existing work.[^709]

Secondly, the general rules on works created by employees and
commissioned works (Article 14 (1)-(3) of the PCA) do not apply to
software. Such rules grant ownership in those works in accordance with
what was contractually agreed between the parties. In the absence of a
contract, the individual creator is deemed to be the author, unless his
name is not mentioned in the work (in which case copyright belongs to
the employer or to the client who commissioned the work).

By contrast, the Software Act establishes that the rights will be
granted to the employer or the client who commissioned the work, unless
(i) the employment contract provides otherwise or (ii) the purpose of
the contract is in contradiction with such solution.[^710] The law does
not clarify, however, whether the employer or client is the original
owner of the rights or whether he is an assignee.

### Economic rights {#_economic_rights}

Articles 5 and 8 of the Software Act bestow upon the right holder three
exclusive economic rights. The first is the permanent or temporary
reproduction of the computer program, by any means or in any form, in
whole or in part. Secondly, the right holder has the right of alteration
of the program and reproduction of the results thereof,[^711] without
prejudice to the rights of the person who alters the program. Thirdly,
the Software Act grants the right of distribution of the program (or its
copies) to the right holder, which includes rental. However, following
Article 8(2) of the Software Act, the right of distribution has its
scope limited by the rule of exhaustion in what sale is concerned.

In addition to these exclusive rights, the original individual creator
might be entitled to a special remuneration right if the following
conditions are met: (i) the program far exceeds the function or job for
which he was engaged; (ii) the computer program was put to other uses or
generated benefits that were not included nor foreseen when the payment
was agreed.[^712]

Finally, according to Article 49 of the PCA — applicable to software via
Article 11(2) of the Software Act — the original individual creator
might also be entitled to a supplementary compensation where he assigned
or encumbered his economic rights against payment. This compensation is
due if the creator has undergone severe economic damages derived from
the disproportionality between that payment and the profit made by the
exploiter. This right, however, lasts only for two years counting from
when the creator became aware of the existence of damages.

### Exceptions to Exclusive Rights {#_exceptions_to_exclusive_rights_3}

Unlike the Software Directive, the Software Act does not devise
exceptions only. Instead, the Portuguese legislator granted certain
rights to the lawful user, which correspond to the exceptions in Article
5 of the Software Directive. The different terminology can in theory
have some implications — namely, while rights can be interpreted
broadly, exceptions must be narrowly construed. Hence, it is possible
that these “rights” of the lawful user are in practice broader than the
corresponding exceptions put forth by the Software Directive.

Article 6 of the Software Act allows the lawful user to make a back-up
copy (paragraph 1 (a)); to observe, study or test the functioning of the
program in order to determine the ideas and principles that underlie any
element of the program if he does so while performing any of the acts of
loading, displaying, running, transmitting or storing the program
(paragraph 1 (b)); and to load, display, run, transmit or store the
program, in order to use it or for purposes of error correction
(paragraph 2).

Out of these rights, only the last one can be overridden by
contract — any contractual provisions contrary to the first two rights
shall be null and void.[^713]

The Software Act further implemented the decompilation exception in more
or less the same terms as the Software Directive.[^714] However, while
the Directive prescribes as null and void contractual clauses contrary
to the whole provision, the Software Act only makes mandatory the rules
on access to information. The rules on the use of the information
obtained — e.g., use for purposes other than interoperability — can be
overridden by contract.

Deviating further from the Software Directive, the Software Act extended
the general copyright exceptions to the regime of computer programs,
save for the private copy exception.[^715] Article 75 of the PCA is the
main provision that regulates copyright exceptions and, following the
implementation of the Information Society Directive, establishes 19
exceptions to the exclusive rights. Article 10 of the Software Act
clarifies that such exceptions are only applicable if compatible with
computer programs, but the provision might still have the effect of
granting a higher number of exceptions than those allowed by the
Directive.

Moreover, Article 10(2) puts forth another exception that was also not
part of the Software Directive: the free analysis of computer programs
as objects of scientific research and teaching. This differs from
Article 6(1)(a), which links the observation, studying or testing to the
functioning of the program in order to determine its ideas or
principles — probably, e.g., to improve the performance of that
particular program. Article 10(2), on the other hand, has a more general
nature, in that its aims are scientific research and teaching.[^716]

### Moral Rights {#_moral_rights_5}

The Software Act does not expressly mention moral rights. Still, Article
9 grants to the “original right holder” the right to be named as the
author of the program and the right to claim authorship over it, which
comes down to the moral right of paternity.[^717] Here, the term
“original right holder” should be taken to mean the individual creator
and not a legal person - it is commonly accepted that Portuguese law
only allows natural persons to hold moral rights.[^718]

The PCA establishes more moral rights in favor of the right
holder — namely, the integrity right and the right of withdrawal.[^719]
The question of whether the moral rights established in the PCA were
also applicable in the context of computer programs was the subject of
some controversy.[^720] This question was somehow settled in late 2012
by the Portuguese Supreme Court, which ruled that the author of a
computer program has “minimum moral rights, being entitled not only to
the right of paternity, but also to the right of integrity.”[^721] The
right of integrity was at the center of the case, but it can be argued
that the Court’s ruling might be extended to also include the right of
withdrawal in the “minimum moral rights” granted to the author of a
computer program.

Moreover, the regime of moral rights as established by the PCA should be
applicable to these moral rights admitted in the context of the Software
Act. Thus, the moral rights of the author of a computer program are
unwaivable and inalienable.[^722]

### Term of protection {#_term_of_protection_3}

As a result of the Council Directive 93/98/EEC, harmonizing the term of
protection of copyright and certain related rights, the same term
applies for computer programs and other works of authorship. The
duration of protection will thus last until 70 years after the death of
the author.[^723] If however the rights are originally granted to
someone other than the intellectual creator (i.e., the natural person
who created the program), the duration is counted from the date when the
program was first lawfully published or divulged.[^724]

### Copyright contracts {#_copyright_contracts}

Apart from the rules on ownership of programs created by employees or
contractors — which, as seen above, might be considered to establish
either original ownership or assignment in favor of a company, Article
11 of the Software Act lays down the contractual regime applicable to
computer programs.

Paragraph 1 of the provision mandates the application of the general
regime of contracts and in particular of the norms relating to the
specific contract at stake, or the most similar one, i.e. that which
presents the greatest degree of analogy.[^725] This refers back to the
Civil Code, but also to the Electronic Commerce Act,[^726] which
regulates electronic contracts, with an emphasis on consumer related
provisions.[^727] It is here important to note the general connection
between the PCA and the Civil Code, as set forth in Article 1303(2) of
the Civil Code.[^728] According to this provision, the rules of the
Civil Code apply in the alternative to intellectual property rights
(including copyright), when they are coherent therewith and do not
contradict special rules set forth in relation thereto.[^729] In any
case, the mention of typified contracts and analogy means that civil
rules and legal theories applying thereto prevail over those applying to
atypical contracts, requiring a case by case assessment of potential
analogies to regulated contracts (e.g. sale and purchase, donation,
lease, etc.) and its careful application by the interpreter.[^730]

Paragraph 2 of Article 11 establishes that certain provisions of the PCA
are applicable to computer programs.[^731] These concern, inter alia,
the norms on usufruct and pledge of copyright,[^732] and the assignment
of rights in future works (which is only valid for works created within
the following 10 years).[^733]

The reference to particular norms of the PCA on copyright contracts
leads to the conclusion that the other norms not referred to are not
applicable to software contracts.[^734] Significantly, it is the case of
Articles 43 and 44 of the PCA, which regulate the formalities inherent
to assignments of copyright. Because of the lack of reference to these
provisions, then, it seems that assignments of rights in software are
not subject to the same formal requirements as any other type of
copyright assignments (written contract with signatures recognized by a
notary public in the case of partial assignment, and public deed in the
case of total assignment).[^735]

The same goes for the formalities applicable to licensing. According to
Article 41 of the PCA, copyright licenses must take the form of a
written agreement and must contain certain elements, such as the
authorized form of use, geographical scope and price. Since Article 41
of the PCA is not part of the provisions that the Software Act refers
to, these formalities would not be applicable to software licensing
either.

Finally, Article 11(3) stipulates that software contracts must be
interpreted in accordance with the principle of good faith and their
ambit construed according to their purpose.[^736]

All in all, Article 11 combines different legal sources to form the
legal regime of software contracts. This might bring about some legal
uncertainty for purposes of identifying the nature of a given software
contract, and the regime thereby applicable to that specific situation.
In any case, it should be kept in mind that, in the context of contract
law, the rule is the contractual freedom of the parties.[^737]
Therefore, parties can choose the legal regime that better suits their
needs, provided that no mandatory rules are infringed.[^738]

In this context, it should be emphasized that the Software Act does not
establish a legal regime for the formation, formal requirements and
effects of software licensing agreements.[^739] Such regime must
therefore be found by articulating the rules explained above.

There is some controversy about whether the specific rules on typified
contracts apply to software agreements.[^740] Some authors resort to a
purpose bound interpretation of software agreements to identify
parallels between these agreements and typified contracts — such as
lease — thus rejecting the qualification of those as atypical.[^741]
Consequently, the rules of the identified typical contract would apply
directly to the software agreement, in combination with rules for
typified copyright contracts (e.g. publishing); an example would be the
application of the rules of lease (in the Civil Code) and those of
publishing agreements (in the PCA) to OEM software deals that involve
the production and distribution of software.[^742] Conversely, other
authors focus on the immaterial nature of software works, rejecting the
direct applicability of rules on contracts that regulate the use and
exploitation of material goods. This position would lead to the
application of rules from typified contracts only through analogy,
meaning that matters of formation, formal requirements and efficacy
could only be regulated by general rules on juridical relations as
applied to contracts, implying a greater degree of flexibility.[^743] We
are of the opinion the latter interpretation is more coherent when
confronting the legal regime with contractual practices on software,
most notably end-user license agreements concluded online.

In fact, online software license agreements are an instance of
electronic distance contracts, meaning that they may call upon the
application not only of the rules mentioned above (such as the Software
Act, the PCA, the Civil Code and the Electronic Commerce Act), but also
rules on distance contracts (in the Distance Contracts Act[^744]), and
standardized agreements (in the Standardized Terms in Contracts Act or
“STCA”[^745]), which are particularly protective of consumers and
translate into additional restrictions to freedom of contract.

This complexity is notorious considering that most end-user software
licenses are in fact standard contracts, where there is no possibility
for users to negotiate particular clauses. Such standard contracts are
entered into by the user following the signing of the terms and
conditions, by opening the packaging, by clicking or selecting an “I
agree” button, or by any other action whereby acceptance can be assumed.
That being the case, the STCA applies.

The STCA states a general principle of prohibition of clauses contrary
to principles of good faith.[^746] Moreover, it forbids the use of
certain clauses in standardized B2B contracts[^747] and in standardized
B2C contracts.[^748] Two types of open lists are put forth in each
context: absolutely forbidden and relatively forbidden clauses (also
called, respectively, “black list” and “grey list”).[^749] Both types of
clauses are considered to be null and void; the difference between them
is that the qualification as a relatively forbidden clause depends on a
case-by-case assessment, taking into account the specific features of
the contract at stake.

In relation to standardized B2B contracts, some relevant examples of
absolutely forbidden clauses include: exclusion of liability for
non-contractual damages;[^750] exclusion of defaulting liability for
intentional misconduct or gross negligence;[^751] attribution of the
exclusive right to interpret any clause of the contract to its
drafter;[^752] or exclusion of compensation, when admitted by law.[^753]
On the other hand, still in the context of B2B contracts, the following
are examples of relatively forbidden clauses: establishment of
excessively long deadlines for acceptance and rejection of proposals in
favor of the drafter;[^754] establishment of said deadlines for
compliance with contractual obligations;[^755] or clauses mandating
disproportionate criminal sanctions.[^756]

With regard to standardized B2C contracts, Article 21 prescribes as
absolutely forbidden clauses, e.g., the unilateral alteration of
obligations;[^757] the unilateral verification and establishment of the
quality of goods and services supplied;[^758] or the vouching for the
parties' legal or factual knowledge in relation to the contract.[^759]
Article 22 focuses on the relatively forbidden clauses in B2C contracts,
namely: the excessively long duration of contract;[^760] the free
termination of contract;[^761] the unjustified prohibition of repairs or
supply by third parties;[^762] or the demand of formalities not
prescribed by law.[^763]

In the context of software contracts, the type of clauses deemed null
and void by the STCA can thus effectively curtail some choices of the
right holder when entering into a contract with potential licensees or
assignees.

### Enforcement {#_enforcement}

Enforcement of copyright in Portugal is regulated by Articles 195 to
211-B of the PCA, which have inter alia implemented the Enforcement
Directive[^764] and provide for a broad range of criminal provisions,
preliminary administrative measures and civil actions. Criminal and
civil liability are independent and can be exercised simultaneously,
either in separate actions or jointly in a criminal procedure.[^765]

Preliminary administrative measures can be requested by the author to
police and administrative authorities with jurisdiction over the place
of occurrence of the unauthorized use; they amount to a request that the
authority causes such use to cease and, in accumulation, apprehends the
totality of the revenue from such unauthorized uses.[^766]

Civil actions include: (i) rights of prior communications, information
and supervision[^767]; (ii) specific evidence gathering and preservation
measures[^768]; (iii) provisional and preliminary injunctions (which
include both copyright specific measures and those available under the
general civil procedure law)[^769]: and (iv) measures to redress
infringement, including a broad right to information regarding the
infringing activity, the application of corrective and inhibitory
measures post-infringement and the establishment of specific criteria
for damages (the latter aspect is addressed in greater detail below in
the “Damages” section.[^770] / [^771]). The possibility of application
of some of these measures or their application above a certain threshold
is limited to infringing acts occurring on a commercial scale.[^772]

Preliminary administrative measures and civil actions (ii) through (iv)
above seem to apply to software as a copyright protected subject
matter.[^773] This is coherent with the Software Act’s specific
provision on the seizure of counterfeit software copies.[^774] Under
this provision, the seizure follows the general regime applicable to
seizure of counterfeit works, being also possible to seize any devices
in commerce the sole intended purpose of which is to facilitate the
unauthorized removal or circumvention of any technical safeguard which
may have been applied to protect a computer program.[^775]

Procedural legitimacy for taking action belongs to the copyright holder
and, where collective rights management applies, to collecting
societies.[^776] In Portugal, the only collecting society representing
software rights holders is ASSOFT - Associação Portuguesa de
Software.[^777] Importantly, the position of exclusive or non-exclusive
licensees of an infringed work is not addressed in the law; however, it
is possible to interpret some provisions as allowing a licensee that can
prove he/she is entitled to use the work (e.g. by presenting the license
agreement in a judicial action) to benefit from said measures.[^778] In
any event, nothing seems to prevent that a third party — such as a
fiduciary — is authorized by the rights holder to take action on his/her
behalf, as Portuguese law does not expressly forbid fiduciary
transmission of rights (e.g. to a collecting society), although some
legal scholarship believes it to be invalid.[^779]

The above considerations apply to actions based on economic exclusive
rights; they do not apply regarding any claims for breach of moral
rights, for which only authors (or their successors) have
legitimacy.[^780]

In what regards criminal law, the Software Act states that software is
protected against unlawful reproduction and makes an express reference
to Law 109/91, of 17 August[^781], which has been replaced by the new
Cybercrime Act.[^782] The articulation of the relevant legal instruments
suggests that the Cybercrime Act should be qualified as lex specialis
regarding the PCA and its criminal sanctions for copyright
infringement.[^783] That being the case, the Cybercrime Act limits the
criminal sanctions for software infringement to acts of unlawful
reproduction, dissemination and communication to the public of a
computer program (presumably including any derivatives), providing jail
sentences up to three years and/or equivalent fines.[^784] The attempted
form of the unlawful acts is punishable, as are acts carried out by
legal persons.[^785] Additionally, the court may rule as lost in favor
of the state any objects, materials, equipment or devices used and owned
by the author of the crimes.[^786]

Unprotected software and public domain software {#_unprotected_software_and_public_domain_software_2}
-----------------------------------------------

As explained above, only software that is original in the sense that it
is the author’s own intellectual creation — or in the Software Act’s
formulation, has “creative character” — benefits from protection
analogous to copyright.[^787]

Non-original software does not come into consideration for copyright
protection and can, in principle, be used freely from copyright
exclusive rights.[^788] However, the functional nature of most software
dictates that the threshold of creativity required for protection is
relatively low, meaning in practice that most software that is not a
copy from another computer program and bears a minimum trait of
connection to its author will in principle be afforded legal protection.

Under Portuguese law, there are no software subject matter specific
public domain rules. Instead, the general rules in the PCA apply,
meaning that public domain is limited to works for which the copyright
term has expired.[^789]

Public domain software — if any exists — can be used, reproduced or
executed freely without permission or the payment of a fee. It can in
certain cases even be presented by third parties as their own
work[^790], and by modifying the original work, third parties can take
certain versions of said software out of the public domain.

Analysis of FOSS under Portuguese Law {#_analysis_of_foss_under_portuguese_law}
-------------------------------------

From a conceptual and legal perspective, FOSS is identical to other
types of software, and benefits from similar protection. Portuguese
copyright law fully supports the rights of the copyright holder to
stipulate terms and conditions in a software license, having the
exclusive right to exercise or authorize the use of the rights of
reproduction, transformation, distribution, and communication to the
public/making available. Therefore, absent public policy prohibitions, a
rights holder is entitled to select the conditions under which he/she
licenses software to third parties, such as via a FOSS license.

Under Portuguese law, FOSS should be considered as software to which
users generally have more rights of use than under a proprietary or
“non-free” software license. This is so due to the breadth and scope of
the underlying FOSS license agreement. As such, and assuming the
validity of a FOSS license, its terms and conditions must be respected
by the user-licensee.

That being said, it is important to note that FOSS licenses deviate
significantly from conventional license agreements. Such deviation
raises issues as to the application thereto of specific qualifications
that may be valid for other software agreements. To compound on the
problem, and as noted above, the wording of the Software Act has led to
extensive debate in Portugal as to the different possible legal
qualifications of software agreements.[^791] In the balance of this
debate, we believe that FOSS licenses should be considered as sui
generis or atypical license agreements, even if they are still based on
similar mechanisms to those of license contracts in general, and of
end-user software license agreements in particular.

### Copyrights {#_copyrights_3}

Although FOSS can be written and owned by one person or be owned by one
legal entity[^792], generally speaking, after some time the software is
the result of the work of several authors who can make claims to it.

The crucial question is whether later additions create a joint
work — i.e. a work created by collaborating authors giving rise to
co-authorship configurations, or whether the original software is the
end work and every contribution created during the further development
of the software is to be deemed a composite or derivative work.[^793]
The legal consequences are different at both authorship and ownership
levels.[^794]

#### Qualification of FOSS {#_qualification_of_foss_7}

For FOSS to be qualified as a joint work of co-authors it is not
necessary for every co-author to have contributed equally, nor are
co-authors required to work on it simultaneously; however, it is
necessary that each contributor intervenes during the creative process
and that the contribution is worthy of copyright protection.[^795] The
provider of an idea is not a co-author[^796], nor is the person who
corrects a technical error or merely follows instructions.[^797]

Whereas the first version of the software, if written by several people,
can in many cases be qualified either as a collective work (when created
in the context of a company) or as a joint work, this seems much less
the case for the later versions, which are based on the original work,
without however there being any “consultation” between the
authors.[^798] These later versions will be qualified as composite or
derivative works,[^799] or possibly (although less likely) collective
works, if the individual or entity author/editor of the new version
collated or organized and directed a series of different programs to
form a distinct new software based on the original. Therefore, in terms
of the legal consequences, a distinction needs to be made between the
rights of the original owner, the original co-authors and the rights of
people or entities who carry out work based on the original work.

#### Rights of the original co-authors {#_rights_of_the_original_co_authors_5}

The general authorship and ownership rules of the PCA apply to the
creation/production of software.[^800] However, if a software work is
made in the context of a company, there is a legal presumption that the
software is a collective work.[^801] Collective works are regulated in
Articles 16-19 of the PCA. The law defines collective works as those
organized by initiative of an individual or collective entity and that
are divulged or published in said entity’s name.[^802] The copyright of
a collective work is granted to the entity that has organized and
directed its creation and in the name of which it has been divulged or
published.[^803]

The full application of the collective works regime presupposes that the
individual contribution of every author in the software work cannot be
discerned or clearly distinguished, i.e. that the work is
“indivisible”.[^804] If however it is possible to make a distinction of
individual contribution(s) within the collective work, then the law
foresees the application of a different legal regime to that
contribution(s), namely the regime of joint works.[^805]

A distinction then must be made between two potentially applicable legal
regimes. First, if a FOSS work is made in the context of a company and
individual contributions cannot be distinguished, the rules on
collective works apply. Likewise if the FOSS work is created by an
employee in the performance of his professional functions or as a result
of instructions of the employer, unless the employment contract (i)
states otherwise or (ii) is silent and the purposes of the contract lead
to a different conclusion.[^806]

Most FOSS works will likely not be made in the context of a company,
meaning that the legal presumption of application of the collective work
provisions will not operate. This leads to the second possibility, where
the FOSS work is deemed a joint work, which the law defines as the work
divulged or published in the name of all the collaborators (co-authors)
or some of them, whether or not individual contributions can be
distinguished.[^807]

In sum, severable contributions both in collective works and joint works
are subject to the same rules.[^808] Indivisible contributions follow
different regimes, specific to the type of work: for collective works
the rights of the contributors in their indivisible contribution are
vested in the individual or entity that is presumed to own the work; for
joint works, the legal regime is different and allows for a degree of
contractual freedom among co-authors.

The legal regime for joint works can be summarized as follows. First,
the copyright ownership of the work, in its unity, belongs to all
co-authors and is regulated pursuant to the rules on co-ownership for
the common exercise of the rights in that work, as set forth in the
Civil Code.[^809] Consequently, for indivisible works, each of the
co-authors must be authorized by the other in order to exercise his/her
copyright separately; in other words, joint exercise is mandated as
general rule.[^810] However, if no agreement is reached, then it will be
possible for any of the co-authors to use the joint work, as long as
he/she does so for the purposes for which the work was created and does
not exclude the remaining co-authors from its use.[^811] Moreover,
exercise of copyright over the indivisible joint work is possible
pursuant to decisions taken by simple majority of the co-authors.[^812]

Second, the specific value of each contribution may be freely stipulated
amongst the co-authors; if it is not agreed to in writing, then all
contributions are deemed to be of identical value.[^813] As mentioned
above, those individuals that merely provide assistance to authors in
the production and divulgation of the work are not deemed co-authors
and, for that reason, do not participate in the copyright on the joint
work.[^814]

Third, it is possible that a joint work is divulged or published solely
in the name of one or a few of the collaborators, in which case a legal
presumption operates: if there is no specific designation of the
remaining co-authors in any part of the work, the law assumes that the
non-designated collaborators have assigned their rights to the named
co-authors.[^815]

Portuguese law provides for two exceptions to this general regime,
applying to severable contributions of individual co-authors (or, by
reference, to homologous contributors to collective works).[^816] On the
one hand, any contributor can request the divulgation, publication,
exploitation or modification of the joint work; in case of dispute, the
matter must be settled under rules of good faith.[^817] That is a
deviation from the simple majority rule applicable to indivisible
works.[^818] On the other hand and in addition, any contributor can,
without prejudice to the joint exploitation of the overall work,
individually exercise the rights pertaining to his identifiable
contribution.[^819]

On balance, the default legal regime described above, together with the
principle of freedom of contract, seem sufficiently compatible with
overall authorship and ownership stipulations in typical FOSS licenses.
What such regime does not allow and the general Portuguese regime does
not permit are agreements that constitute waivers to moral rights, as
discussed in greater detail below.[^820]

#### Authors of derivative or composite works {#_authors_of_derivative_or_composite_works}

After some time FOSS will, in most cases, be a composite or derivative
work.[^821] Composite works are those that incorporate, in the whole or
in part, a pre-existing work, while derivative works are those that
imply a transformation of a pre-existing work; in both instances, the
incorporation or transformation would be done with the authorization but
without the collaboration or “consultation” of the rights holder of the
underlying work.[^822] The last aspect distinguishes composite or
derivative works from joint works.

The authors of the composite or derivative work are the only persons
with a copyright on their work.[^823] This is an independent and full
copyright, which is restricted insofar as the composite or derivative
work cannot be operated without the consent of the owner of the
copyright on the original or pre-existing work.[^824] For typical FOSS
licenses, this consent should theoretically not pose a problem as it is
included in the license; this, of course, subject to the compliance with
the terms and conditions of said license (e.g. regarding further
distribution of the derivative work).[^825] In fact, such consent would
equate to an authorization for a specific use (incorporation, adaptation
or transformation), meaning that it would in principle not trigger the
application of the most problematic formal requirements applying to
assignments or transmissions of copyright under Portuguese law.[^826]
This contractual structure would also in principle allow authors in both
works to judicially enforce their respective copyrights.

#### Management of copyrights {#_management_of_copyrights}

With the purpose of controlling the chain of copyright ownership in a
more efficient manner, it may be useful to concentrate all copyrights
concerning a FOSS project within one organization, with the aim to
simplify the management and jointly enforce rights. The contractual
method underlying such concentration of rights is however a crucial
issue under Portuguese Law.

One of the possible methods is via a transfer or assignment, as
suggested for example by the Free Software Foundation Europe (“FSFE”),
which provides a Fiduciary License Agreement (“FLA”) for rights holders
to assign their rights to a fiduciary, preferably the FSFE itself.[^827]
In general terms, the fiduciary transfer means that the assignee shall
not act on his own name and behalf but on account of the assignors
(typically the original authors).

Such contractual arrangement does not correspond per se to an instance
of collective rights management, which is subject to specific
authorization and supervision requirements under Portuguese law.[^828]
Moreover, contrary to other countries,[^829] collective rights
management in Portugal is not so much based on a fiduciary transfer of
copyrights, but more on a licensing and representation mechanism.[^830]

Not being a case of (regulated) collective rights management, such
agreements would need to conform to the general rules on contractual
assignments of copyright applicable to software works, which are far
from uncontroversial under Portuguese Law.[^831]

In general, there are two possible interpretations of the legal rules of
assignment in this field, depending on how one articulates the relevant
provisions of the Software Act, the PCA and the Civil Code.

On the one hand, it is possible to argue that the Software Act contains
a special regime for contracts, whereby a particular agreement is
subject to the general rules on contracts in the Civil Code plus the
rules on typified contracts that present the greatest similarities to
the underlying deal, but excluding provisions of the PCA not expressly
mentioned by the Software Act in its Article 11(2).[^832] Among the
omitted provisions are those anachronistic PCA rules on partial and
total assignments, which impose severe formal requirements on copyright
assignments, under penalty of nullity.[^833] Under this interpretation,
an agreement such as the FLA would probably be valid vis-à-vis
Portuguese Law.

Alternatively, if it is considered that the PCA provisions on
assignments apply, it is difficult to defend the validity of a transfer
under the FLA, as it fails to comply with essential formal requirements;
this would entail the nullity of such agreements.[^834] However, if the
agreement in question contains provisions whereby an assignment is
converted into a broad grant of rights in countries where the first
contractual method is not legally admissible — as is the case with the
FLA[^835] --, then it is possible to argue in favor of the validity of
such agreement.

Given the lack of legal certainty as to requirements applying to
assignments and the formal requirements the PCA attaches thereto, it is
arguable that a concentration of rights in a single organization via
broad authorization of use contractual schemes constitutes a superior
solution to secure the validity and effectiveness of the method.

### Moral rights and FOSS {#_moral_rights_and_foss}

The US origin of FOSS is perhaps in no issue clearer than in its
treatment of moral rights, a subject to which it attaches comparatively
less importance than countries in civil law systems.[^836] In this
respect, the Open Source Definition specifies that the author of
software distributed under a FOSS license cannot oppose the use of the
software by certain people and groups or for certain areas of
application.[^837] The question then becomes what is the admissibility
of such provisions when they purport to constitute a waiver of moral
rights.

Here, again, Portuguese law is not clear. As mentioned before, the
Software Act does not expressly mention moral rights, but its Article 9
is usually interpreted as covering this topic.[^838] This provision
guarantees the original rights holder (understood in this Chapter as the
natural person) the right to be mentioned by name in the program and
that of claiming its authorship, being silent on the applicability of
other moral rights set forth in the PCA.[^839]

Also as mentioned above, some legal scholarship has interpreted this
provision as meaning, a contrario sensu, that no other moral rights are
granted to authors of software works.[^840] Such interpretation would
mean that an author of a FOSS work would not even have to proceed to a
global renouncement of the future exercise of moral rights (other than
mention of name and paternity), as he would not be deemed to have such
rights.

Even if this argumentation is solid, we note that it’s not unanimous,
with relevant legal scholarship defending that software authors have the
same moral rights as prescribed for most authors under the PCA, although
to a reduced degree, given the specific nature of software as a work of
authorship.[^841] That reduced degree is particularly important, as the
Software Act grants a broad right of transformation, the scope of which
limits to a significant extent that of the moral right of
integrity,[^842] and would probably accommodate most FOSS licensing
provisions enabling downstream derivative works. Such interpretation is
likely the most coherent with the aforementioned Portuguese Supreme
Court ruling of 2012 recognizing “minimum moral rights” to authors of
computer programs.[^843]

### Enforcing FOSS licenses {#_enforcing_foss_licenses_5}

#### General Considerations {#_general_considerations}

The question of whether a FOSS license can be enforced under the
Portuguese legal system depends on whether a valid license was issued.
For the assessment of such validity inquiry, two essential questions
must be answered: (i) who are the contracting parties, and (ii) has the
license been validly reached? We will answer these questions in turn
against the backdrop of our previous framing of the regime applicable to
software contracts under Portuguese law.[^844] Some preliminary remarks
are however required.

Copyright protection of software via exclusive rights implies that use
of protected works (such as FOSS) requires authorization by the
respective owners, except when such use is covered by an exception or
limitation. FOSS licenses are designed to provide such authorization, a
construct which is conceptually distinct from that of a copyright
assignment or transmission. As noted above, Article 11 of the Software
Act opens the door for the use of external contractual rules not only of
the PCA, but also of the Civil Code and a myriad of other legal
instruments.[^845]

The application of some of these rules impacts directly the discussion
on the validity of FOSS licenses. For example, as noted above, the PCA
contains general provisions on formal and content requirements of
copyright contracts.[^846] The validity of FOSS licenses is discussed in
greater detail below; however, it is important to note that, in what
concerns content requirements, the application of the general PCA rules
on copyright contracts to FOSS licenses would likely not be problematic,
as these licenses in principle meet such minimum requirements.[^847]

Moreover, in what regards qualification of FOSS licenses, these present
such a specific type of use regulation that the direct application
thereto of typified contracts (either in the PCA or Civil Code) seems a
conceptual stretch. The predominant non-commercial purpose of the
licensing aspect in such agreements (not only in terms of reproduction
but also in terms of distribution or conveyance), and the focus on
allowing transformations on the immaterial work that constitutes the
license object do not satisfactorily overlap with existing contractual
types.[^848] Thus, matters of validity and efficacy must be addressed
and evaluated in light of general rules — notably mutual consent and
freedom of form — applying to software agreements, as well as admissible
analogies to existing types.

Finally, part of the legal instruments and rules applying to agreements
such as FOSS licenses translate into obligations of information and
transparency to consumers prior to the conclusion of the contract,
together with safeguards of his/her position as the party with a weaker
bargaining position (i.e. the user-licensee). To that extent, taking
into consideration the nature and configuration of FOSS licenses, such
rules do not seem to challenge per se their validity. Insofar as these
rules may translate into imperative provisions in addition to the
legitimate user’s minimum rights in the Software Act, it is however
important to ascertain whether FOSS licenses conflict with them.

#### Contracting parties {#_contracting_parties_4}

The issue of who are the contracting parties in a FOSS licensing scheme
depends on its constitution. In the simplest formulation the answer is
clear: if an author makes his/her work available under a FOSS license,
the license is reached as between the author and the licensee. However,
if there are different co-authors, the issue becomes more complicated.
With whom the licensee concludes a contract depends then on the mutual
agreement between the co-authors.

In the majority of cases, a FOSS work will be the creative result of the
output of several authors, who developed it in separate and not in joint
consultation with each other. In fact, FOSS is typically realized via a
chain of authors who all contributed to the realization of the program.

Insofar as a new author makes an original contribution to the work
(i.e., with the “creative character” required by the Software Act), a
composite or (most likely) a derivative work is produced.

Given that both the rights to use (reproduction) and make derivatives
(transformation or adaption) fall within the purview of the author’s
exclusive rights, each potential licensee will require the consent of
every author in the chain who made an original contribution to the
eventual FOSS work, starting with the author of the first work. This
consent can be direct (i.e. to the next licensee in the chain), or
indirect by giving consent in the FOSS license to the next author to
modify and distribute the work to subsequent authors/contributors or
users.

The majority of FOSS licenses address this potential problem by
introducing “viral” provisions establishing a contractual bound between
the licensee and all authors in the chain of derivative works, in such a
way as to expressly cover the possibility of onward licensing of each
author’s contribution. This has certainly been true for the several
iterations of the GPL licenses, from version 1 to the current version
3[^849], Article 10 of which (on “Automatic Licensing of Downstream
Recipients”) reads, in the relevant part: “Each time you convey a
covered work, the recipient automatically receives a license from the
original licensors, to run, modify and propagate that work, subject to
this License… You may not impose any further restrictions on the
exercise of the rights granted or affirmed under this License.”[^850]

This provision builds upon and extends the homologous provisions in
previous versions. It allows each user of the FOSS work to obtain a
license from all authors in the chain. Insofar as this licensing chain
of (mostly) derivate works is configured as a chain of agreements for
specified uses of software works to which the respective authors have
consented to, it should be considered valid under Portuguese law.

#### Validity of the FOSS licenses {#_validity_of_the_foss_licenses_2}

The choice of a FOSS license by an author is motivated by the desire to
distribute and make available his work to third parties, possibly
subject to certain use restrictions. In that sense, it is essential that
such restrictions be enforceable.

The valid formation of a contract under Portuguese Law generally
requires an offer and acceptance of the offer via a manifestation of
consent to be bound by the terms of the offer.[^851] Conventional IT
agreements are entered into by the explicit acceptance of the terms and
conditions by the licensee following the signing of the terms and
conditions, by opening the packaging, by clicking or selecting an “I
agree” button or by any other action from which acceptance can be
recognized. The latter examples are — similarly to FOSS
licenses — pre-formulated standard contracts.[^852] These methods to
reach a licensing agreement have been sufficiently tried and tested and,
at least between commercial parties, are generally considered to be
valid.[^853] FOSS licenses concluded in the same way will be valid.

Typically, in a FOSS environment, however, software is made available
with the simple specification on a website (e.g., “licensed under the
GPLv3 license”) or in the source code of the software that it concerns
FOSS.[^854] In such configurations, there is no requirement that the
license is explicitly accepted via an affirmative manifestation of
consent by the licensee. Having to click and confirm every time could in
some cases interfere with the use of the software. The Open Source
Definition opposes demanding explicit agreement with the license
conditions with the aim of confirming the agreement between licensor and
licensee.[^855] The main question that arises here is whether in these
cases a valid license is entered into.

The answer to this question is unclear. FOSS licenses are subject, inter
alia, to the rules on electronic contracts in the Electronic Commerce
Act.[^856] Although this legal instrument contains a legal fiction for
consent based on a need for consent plus a subsequent confirmation by
the licensee, this double consent in principle would not be required in
B2B or direct (meaning online) B2C (with immediate delivery), as is the
case with many FOSS licenses.[^857] That notwithstanding, the licensee’s
confirmation would be required, as would minimum information
requirements considering the applicable license. However, these legal
provisions must be applied in the context of a FOSS licensing
transaction, where the licensee is a user of a copyright protected work,
who therefore is required to indicate the grounds on which he/she is
able to use the work. Using the software without the author’s consent
entails copyright infringement. That implies that everyone who wants to
use software which they find via the internet has an obligation to
actively look for a license. If the user cannot prove he has a
license[^858], he must refrain from using it. The mere availability of a
software work on the internet does not mean it becomes public
domain[^859] and there is no Portuguese case law that sustains the
applicability of a doctrine of implied consent (free of FOSS terms and
conditions) in these cases.[^860]

As such, it is arguable that the unavailability of the applicable terms
and conditions may give rise to licensee challenges to the validity of
certain clauses or terms of the contract. A licensor could respond by
stating that even de minimis indications, coupled with the above
arguments would necessarily mean that specific FOSS licensing terms
apply to all such software he makes available (thus constituting the
required written contract). Accordingly, a disagreement with those terms
would mean a failure of the licensee to accept the applicable terms of
use, the consequence being that no license had been granted and any use
of the FOSS would be an infringement of copyright. Competent Portuguese
Courts would in all likelihood afford relevance to business practices in
the professional sector as to the conclusion of such contracts. To that
point, the Portuguese practice is similar to other European countries,
where it is common knowledge and practice of software developers that
FOSS licenses are made available to be read in the source code or on the
project website.[^861] In sum, in this professional context any
arguments that the FOSS terms were unknown or that the FOSS license did
not validly bind the parties are unlikely to succeed.[^862]

In any event, it seems doubtful that a user would benefit from disputing
the existence of a FOSS license, as that would imply the invalidity of
the copyright license and prevent him/her from using the FOSS.

Finally, the obligation to establish the existence of specific licensing
terms governing the transaction is also relevant if we consider specific
contractual rules in the PCA as directly applicable to FOSS agreements.
This is because copyright contracts under PCA are subject to a principle
of solemnity, meaning that they must be in written form.[^863] The
Portuguese Supreme Court and some legal scholarship qualify this
requirement as a formality ad probationem, directed at establishing the
existence of the agreement and proving it.[^864] This position is
controversial, as it is possible to instead qualify said requirement as
an ad substantiam formality (required for the validity of the agreement
itself), by focusing on the general default rule of the Civil Code that
any contractual declaration inconsistent with legally prescribed formal
requirements is null, unless stated otherwise.[^865] The adoption of
this argument would lead to the nullity of FOSS agreements where it is
impossible to establish the underlying licensing terms.

#### Breach of FOSS licenses {#_breach_of_foss_licenses}

Infringement of FOSS licenses may give rise to separate claims, on the
basis of copyright infringement and breach of contract.[^866] A claim
for copyright infringement is justified solely when the violation
affects the exclusive rights of the author protected by copyright. This
may bring about both civil and criminal measures, with the first being
of significant scope post-implementation of the Enforcement
Directive.[^867] The breach of FOSS contractual clauses not based on the
exclusive rights of the author does not imply copyright infringement,
translating instead into breach of contract, regulated by the Civil
Code. Typical examples thereof are the non-payment of royalties,
insufficient exploitation of the work and the violation of
non-competition obligations. The rights holder is legally entitled to
take action in civil courts under both claims. In fact, from a
litigation practice standpoint, he/she would be advised to do so, due to
potential challenges on the validity of the FOSS license.

### Waiver and liability {#_waiver_and_liability_4}

Typically, FOSS licenses contain very strong exoneration clauses, which
discharge the author from all liability.[^868] One of the traditional
justifications of FOSS proponents for this is that FOSS is often made
available without a fee, as a result of which the author generates
insufficient income to pay for liability insurances and legal
costs.[^869] This argument, although uncontested vis-à-vis amateur
programmers, does not apply to the same extent in relation to
professional programmers who build their business model around FOSS. To
cover the eventuality of being held liable for applicable default legal
provisions, professional suppliers of FOSS or related services often
provide guarantees and technical support, a practice allowed by some
FOSS licensing terms.[^870] The main legal issue raised in this context
relates to the admissibility of such exoneration clauses under
Portuguese law.

#### General rules on exclusion and limitation of liability {#_general_rules_on_exclusion_and_limitation_of_liability}

Most clauses of this type are aimed at eliminating or restricting (e.g.,
by establishing a monetary ceiling) ex ante the Licensor’s obligation to
indemnify the licensee for damages caused by the licensed FOSS.

Under Portuguese law and in the context of contractual liability, any
clause whereby the creditor (here: the licensor) waives in advance any
of his legally established rights for instances of breach of contract or
delay by the debtor (here: the licensee), is null and void.[^871] This
is subject to one exception: such waivers or limitations are deemed
acceptable for damages resulting from acts of legal representatives and
auxiliary persons, so long as the exemption does not cover acts in
violation of duties imposed by norms of public order.[^872]

This general rule is supplemented by specific rules applying to
pre-formulated standard contracts, which not only prohibit general
clauses contrary to the principle of good faith, but also specific
exoneration clauses found in B2B and B2C agreements.[^873] These
specific rules prohibit clauses in standardized contracts that exclude
or limit (directly or indirectly) liability for: Damages to life, moral
or physical integrity, or health; Non-contractual economic damages
caused to the licensee or a third party; Damages resulting from
intentional (with “dolo”) or grossly negligent (with “culpa grave”)
non-performance, delay or defective performance; Damages resulting from
intentional or grossly negligent acts of legal representatives and
auxiliary persons.[^874]

In sum, it can be stated that most exemption or limitation clauses
present in FOSS licenses should be deemed null and void when they
purport to apply to intentional or grossly negligent acts; in addition,
specific clauses (e.g. applying to defective performance or acts of
legal representatives and auxiliary persons) may be valid only in cases
of minor negligence (“culpa leve”).[^875]

#### Specific rules for consumers, sellers and producers {#_specific_rules_for_consumers_sellers_and_producers}

In addition to the general regime explained above, stricter rules may
apply that completely forbid exoneration or limitation clauses, notably
when the licensor qualifies as a producer or professional seller in a
relationship with a consumer.[^876]

As a preliminary remark, it is important to note that many FOSS projects
should not be qualified as producers or professional sellers. Likewise,
a good number of licensees are developers and not consumers. Therefore,
the following considerations do not apply to either category of actors
in the FOSS licensing chain.

A further distinction must be made between the qualification of the
licensor as a “producer” or a “seller”. Under the Portuguese Sale of
Consumer Goods Act[^877], a “producer” is a manufacturer, EU importer or
any other entity that is identified as the producer of a consumer
good.[^878] It is disputable whether FOSS developers and distributers
can also be qualified as producers.[^879] Differently, a “seller” is the
individual or company that, under a contract, sells (leases or provides
related services to) consumer goods within his/her professional
activity.[^880] The Sale of Consumer Goods Act applies only to consumer
goods, defined as immovable goods and “movable tangible goods” (“bem
móvel corpóreo”).[^881]

If nonetheless one considers that licensed software qualifies as a
consumer good (and the underlying transaction is a “sale” or “lease”),
then the professional seller is deemed to know of any hidden defects in
the software that are manifested up until 2 years after its
“delivery”.[^882] As a consequence of such defects, the consumer is
entitled to the reparation/substitution of the good or termination of
the contract,[^883] in which case he/she is entitled to damages arising
from the supply of defective goods.[^884] Any exemption or limitation of
liability clause that affects consumer rights derived from hidden
defects known (or presumed to be known) by the seller at the time of the
sale is null and void.[^885]

Under such a fact pattern, the professional seller of FOSS would be
liable before the consumer under a presumption that the lack of
conformity existed as of the good’s delivery date, unless he/she could
demonstrate the lack of conformity to be incompatible with the nature of
the good or with the characteristics of the defect.[^886] Under the
general regime on the sale of goods (applicable to software and FOSS
only if one considers the analogy admissible), the seller would be
liable to repair or replace the software unless he/she could establish
lack of knowledge (without reasonable grounds for knowing) of the
defect.[^887] Failure to establish this “unintentional” lack of
knowledge entitles the licensee to termination of the agreement and
damages.[^888] In practice, the burden of proof of the seller in either
case will be difficult to meet.

Should the developers or distributors of FOSS be qualified as producers,
the Sale of Consumer Goods Act’s rules on direct liability of the
producer may apply.[^889] According to these, the consumer is always
entitled to claim from the producer the reparation or replacement of the
good, unless such claim is impossible or disproportionate taking into
consideration the value of the good, the nature of the defect and the
inconveniences caused to the consumer by the reparation or
replacement.[^890] Importantly, claims under this Act cannot be waived
or limited in advance; any agreements to the contrary are null and void.

Moreover, the Consumer Protection Act confers upon the consumer a right
to damages resulting from the supply of defective goods or
services,[^891] making the producer strictly liable for all damages
arising from defects in the goods he places on the market.[^892]
Similarly to the Sale of Consumer Goods Act, these consumer rights may
not be waived or limited in advance; any agreements to the contrary are
null and void.[^893]

Finally, the producer is also strictly liable under the Liability for
Defective Products Act[^894] for damages caused by his or hers unsafe
defective products.[^895] Only damages resulting in death and personal
injury, or those related to goods of the licensee destined to private
use are covered.[^896] The producer can only avoid liability by showing
the occurrence of specific circumstances, such as that he did not make
the product available.[^897] Importantly for FOSS, the producer is not
responsible if he proves that he did not manufacture the product for
sale or any type of commercial distribution, nor that he produced or
distributed it within the scope of a professional activity.[^898] Again,
these rights may not be waived or limited in advance; any agreements to
the contrary null and void.[^899]

In sum, disclaimers of liability (either by the producer or the seller)
will usually be held invalid with respect to consumer users, to the
extent that the cited legal provisions apply to FOSS licenses.[^900] As
mentioned above, other than arguing that FOSS is not a “consumer good”
or a “product” under applicable laws, it can also be defended that there
is no commercial relationship between the parties (and thus, the
licensor is not a producer or seller) in most instances of a FOSS chain
of licensing. That being the case, consumer laws or related provisions
would not apply to the full extent. This line of argument is reinforced
by the free (gratis) nature of FOSS. However, the countervailing
argument could be made that this free nature is not definitive, as also
professional sellers provide software for free.

Finally, some FOSS licenses contain interpreting provisions, which limit
the contractual effects of these limitations or exclusions of liability
“to the extent permitted by mandatory applicable law”.[^901] It is
arguable that such safeguard provisions might secure the remaining
validity of the limitation or exclusion clause in an adapted version by
allowing competent courts to operate the reduction or conversion of the
invalid portion of such clauses, so as to comply with mandatory legal
provisions.[^902]

### The Copyleft Principle {#_the_copyleft_principle_4}

#### Principle {#_principle_7}

A characteristic found in different (but not all) FOSS licenses is the
so-called “copyleft” principle.[^903] FOSS licenses that incorporate the
copyleft principle[^904] lay down by contract that everyone in the chain
of consecutive users, in return for the right of use that is assigned
(or licensed), needs to distribute the improvements made to the software
and the derivative works created under the same conditions to other
users, if he/she chooses to distribute or make available such
improvements or derivative works. In other words, software that
incorporates copyleft FOSS needs to be distributed or made available
subsequently as copyleft FOSS. As such, it is not possible to
incorporate copyright protected parts of copyleft software in a
proprietary licensed work.

The copyleft principle can restrict the commercial possibilities of the
software.[^905] Warnings have been issued for the dangers that companies
run if a negligent or vindictive employee were to incorporate a piece of
copyleft code in the code of proprietary software. In theory this could
mean that the company would be obliged to make its proprietary software
available under a copyleft FOSS license. Although caution is necessary,
the relevant question is whether these worst-case scenarios are
realistic under Portuguese law.

The sanction for incorporating copyleft code in proprietary software
will usually be restricted to either a prohibition to distribute the
software which is in breach or the obligation to remove this piece of
code from the program. If the unlawful use has caused damage to the
author, this damage will need to be redressed, but usually not beyond an
amount correspondent to the damage actually suffered.[^906] In any
event, it is unlikely that the owner of the proprietary software at
stake would be obliged to release all its code under the copyleft FOSS
license.

#### Copyleft Validity {#_copyleft_validity}

The question relating to the validity of the copyleft clause coincides
with the question of whether a rights holder is able to validly lay down
the conditions under which composite or derivative works must be
distributed or made available. The answer to this question is
affirmative: while the rights holder of the original work does not hold
any copyright in the derivative work, he/she is entitled to determine
the conditions for the creation and redistribution of a derivative work
of the original work.[^907] A composite or derivative work can therefore
only be exploited subject to the consent of the copyright owner of the
original work.[^908]

Based on the copyright ownership of his/her specific contribution to the
FOSS, a rights holder is thus able to authorize a specific use of the
work, or link certain terms and conditions to it. That right to
determine the destined use or conditions of use of a work is clearly
stated in the PCA, namely in Article 40(b) — establishing the general
right to authorize uses of a copyrighted work, Article 41 — laying down
the general regime for such authorizations, Article 67 — establishing a
general exclusive right to use and exploit a work — and art.
68 — clarifying the broad scope of such right to use, and exemplifying
with instances of uses that correspond to acts of adaptation or creation
of derivative works. Therefore, the rights holder is entitled to lay
down a copyleft condition to the use of his/her works based on these
rights.[^909]

All rights are subject to abuse, including copyright. In particular,
contractual terms and conditions must comply with imperative legal
provisions — such as those regarding consumer protection and data
privacy --, as well as with morality and public order.

Under Portuguese civil law, an abuse of right is defined as an exercise
of a right in which the rights holder manifestly exceeds the limits
imposed by good faith, prevailing costumes of by the social or economic
purpose of the underlying right.[^910] An author can therefore not
exercise his economic and moral rights in a random way that conflicts
with the aforementioned principles. Yet, the exercise by a rights holder
of his copyrights by determining the terms and conditions of
exploitation pursuant to his/her entitlements under the PCA, the
Software Act or other related legal instrument cannot be deemed an abuse
of rights “per se”; in fact, only in exceptional cases and circumstances
will an author who invokes his copyright be liable to a claim of abuse
of rights.

Therefore, licensing a work under a copyleft restriction will in
principle not constitute an abuse of right, considering that the author,
in general, will be able to prove a legitimate moral or tangible
interest in selecting that form of “exploitation”. An example of such an
interest shared by most authors that select this private ordering model
is the desire to release and maintain the work under the FOSS
“ecosystem” or “commons”, also in a derivative or modified format.
Significantly, this “personal interest” echoes a similar public interest
motivation of such authors. Likewise, companies which have built
business models around distributing or making available software under
copyleft restrictions will as a rule have no difficulties in
establishing a legitimate interest.

However, it should be noted that the scope of copyleft provisions — and
by extension an author-licensor’s entitlement — covers only the original
work, derivative works and any composite works incorporated therein.
Independent works are outside the scope of a FOSS work and the copyleft
provision. In other words, the expansion of the scope of application of
any such provision to works outside the aforementioned scope could be
deemed an abuse of (copyright) rights, as it would purport to extend the
author-licensor’s exclusive right beyond that which is legally
permitted. Examples of such abusive copyleft provisions would be those
applying to works not covered by copyright (either excluded ab initio
from protection or already in the public domain) and independent works
stored on a similar carrier device than that of a FOSS license.[^911]

Conversely, an argument could be made that, being the FOSS license a
contract, it would be subject to the general principle of freedom of
contract, under which parties are free to stipulate the terms and
conditions of their agreement, subject to restrictions in the law.[^912]
In that sense, if the condition imposed on further distribution is
considered legally admissible, the licensee could be deemed bound by
such clauses, even if exogenous to copyright. However, it is noteworthy
that such restriction clauses might clash with competition law
provisions — e.g. prohibiting certain forms of tying and bundling or
restrictions on legitimate commercial uses[^913] — or even consumer
protection laws that prohibit restrictions or imposition of conditions,
as noted above.[^914]

Finally, it has been argued that copyleft restrictions may run contrary
to the exhaustion principle, with regard to the exclusive right of
distribution of tangible copies of software. However, the Software
Act — in articulation with the PCA — prescribe that any act of
distribution of tangible copies by the rights holder or with his consent
results in the exhaustion of the right to control the distribution of
that copy in the European Union, with the exception of the right to
control the further leasing and lending out of the program or a copy
thereof.[^915] Importantly, this “exhaustion” is designed to apply to
controlling the tangible copy lawfully released in the European market.
In theory, it does not affect the right of the author to lay down
certain conditions regarding the use of the (intangible) work on that
copy. As such, the conditions of use established in the license on this
work “run” with the tangible copy, as the sole authorization to exploit
the intangible work on that copy.

The above conclusions seem unaffected by the most recent CJEU decision
in UsedSoft v Oracle, where it was decided that Article 4(2) of the
Software Directive is to be interpreted “as meaning that the right of
distribution of a copy of a computer program is exhausted if the
copyright holder who has authorized, even free of charge, the
downloading of that copy from the internet onto a data carrier has also
conferred, in return for payment of a fee intended to enable him to
obtain a remuneration corresponding to the economic value of the copy of
the work of which he is the proprietor, a right to use that copy for an
unlimited period.”[^916] In fact, even in case of direct application of
the ruling in UsedSoft v Oracle to the fullest extent to FOSS licenses,
such application would likely not affect the validity of the copyleft
provisions to subsequent making available of that copy to downstream
licensees (or assignees).

### Damages {#_damages_2}

Damages caused by copyright infringement are compensated in accordance
with Articles 210 and 211 of the PCA, and generally applicable
principles of law relating to unlawful acts (non-contractual
infringements) and breaches of contract.[^917] Article 210, regarding
the unlawful identification of a third party as an author, restates a
general principle in the Civil Code and is therefore redundant. Article
211, on the other hand, is the key provision under the PCA concerning
damages, as it constitutes the national implementation of Article 13 of
the Enforcement Directive. It has been characterized as a long and
unclear provision of difficult articulation with the general
regime.[^918]

As with the general regime, Article 211 of the PCA entitles the injured
party in a copyright infringement to request compensation for the losses
and damages resulting from the infringement.[^919] It basically sets
forth two alternative regimes for the calculation of compensation by
damages.

The first regime, echoing Article 13(1)(a) of the Enforcement Directive,
covers economic and non-economic damages. Economic damages encompass:
(i) infringer’s profits[^920]; (ii) lost profits of the infringed party;
and (iii) emerging damages of the infringed party.[^921] / [^922] The
provision on non-economic damages in Article 211(4) of the PCA is less
clear, as it creates some tensions with the general regime for these
types of damages.[^923] Under the general regime, the calculation of
these damages follows the principle of equity, meaning that it takes
into account the degree of intentionality of the infringer, the economic
situation of both infringer and infringed party and other relevant
circumstances.[^924] By meshing these factors and introducing a certain
degree of deviation therefrom, the text of Article 211(4) of the PCA
might lead to an expansive interpretation of the scope of these damages
for copyright infringement; however, it is our view that such different
textual articulation merely impacts the method of calculation of
non-economic damages, leaving their scope unaffected.[^925]

The application of the second regime, which implements art. 13(1)(b) of
the Enforcement Directive, is subject to two conditions: (i) the
impossibility to apply the first method of calculation (i.e., it is
designed as an alternative to the first; (ii) the express acceptance by
the rights holder that the alternative method is used.[^926] Under the
alternative method, a minimum baseline amount of damages is established;
such minimum threshold is to be equal to the hypothetical remuneration
of the infringed party should he/she had granted the infringer a license
covering the infringing acts.[^927] This presumed license calculation
method — an innovation in Portuguese law — provides a less complex
alternative to the alternative described above, and should for that
reason become popular in judicial practice.[^928] Like the first method,
it allows rights holders to recover expenses; differently, it makes no
mention to non-economic damages.[^929] Notwithstanding, it is our
opinion, following some legal scholarship, that non-economic damages are
also recoverable under this second method.[^930]

Finally, Article 211(6) of the PCA stipulates that, if the infringer is
a repeat offender of the infringed party’s rights or the infringing act
is deemed particularly serious, the court may calculate damages by
cumulating some or all of the criteria in paragraphs (1) to (5). This
could be interpreted as an introduction of punitive damages for
copyright infringement. However, given that the provision basically
allows for the combination of both methods described above, and that the
presumed license method only applies if the first method does not, the
scope of the provision seems limited, likely resulting in adding density
to the calculation of non-economic damages based on equity.[^931]

Infringements of software copyrights follow the same regime as
infringements of every other copyright for damages purposes.[^932] The
aforementioned principles, measures and methods of calculation are
therefore applicable in case of copyright infringements of software. As
such, for software distributed under a FOSS license, infringements will
be sanctioned in the same manner; the specific nature of FOSS licenses
cannot be construed as a waiver by the author of these rights.

It is possible to argue that in an infringement of FOSS the damage to
the copyright owner will be limited, as the author has made his work
freely available via the internet. This argument, even if it is prima
facie coherent at least vis-à-vis patrimonial damages, does not always
apply. Besides establishing a reputation and recognition with the
related value creation, an author can have other reasons to make his
work *freely* available.[^933] The author may also have a direct
monetary advantage from the free making available of his work, such as
generating advertising revenue off the FOSS work (where the gratis
nature of the work potentiates its user base), providing related
services (e.g. management, consulting or development), licensing
proprietary add-ons[^934] or providing a dual licensing model.[^935] The
latter model encompasses a dual-track licensing scheme, whereby the
licensor grants first a copyleft license for a FOSS work, thus ensuring
its fast dissemination to a wide user-base; at a later stage, the
licensor makes available a second non-copyleft license against
consideration, targeted at interested parties wishing to use the work
without their own additions being affected by “viral” copyleft effects
of the initial FOSS license.

FOSS Cases in Portugal {#_foss_cases_in_portugal}
----------------------

No cases have been reported yet (December 2013).

South Africa {#chap.southafrica}
============

author:\[Rens,Andrew\]

Introduction to Software Protection under South African Law {#_introduction_to_software_protection_under_south_african_law}
-----------------------------------------------------------

### Body of Law {#_body_of_law_4}

The law affecting rights and control over computer programs is
essentially statutory. Rights in software in South Africa arise
primarily from the Copyright Act[^936]. Historically South African
copyright legislation and judicial interpretation of copyright
legislation have been influenced by British law. Software is in theory
not patentable in South Africa[^937], but since South Africa registers
patents without substantive examination patents over software have been
registered[^938]. Although these patents are in principle void it is
necessary to approach a court to declare them void thus they have some
effect in practice.

Apart from copyright and patent legislation rights to computer programs
are most affected by the common law of contract. South Africa is a Roman
Dutch common law jurisdiction[^939] in which the principles underlying
the common law of contract and property are based upon the 'ius
civilis’in a way analogous to Scotland. It is worth noting that South
Africa has a fully justiciable Bill of Rights which includes
socio-economic rights and enables the enforcement of fundamental rights
against non-State actors. The Constitutional Court has refused to
recognize a right to intellectual property as a fundamental right.[^940]

### Copyright Act: Object of Protection {#_copyright_act_object_of_protection}

Computer programs are the subject of copyright protection as a
specifically designated category of work. A computer program is defined
as a set of instructions which when used directly or indirectly in a
computer, directs its operation to bring about a result’[^941]. Both
subject and object code therefore fall within the definition of computer
program. A program need not function correctly to be eligible for
copyright protection[^942]. The definition of literary works explicitly
excludes computer programs. However preparatory materials such as flow
charts do not fall within the definition of computer program and are
therefore protected as literary works. Other categories of works such as
cinematographic films are defined so as to exclude computer
programs[^943].

To be eligible for copyright a computer program must be reduced to
material form[^944]. Recording as ‘digital data’ meets the requirement.
Copyright is regarded as an immovable intangible[^945].

### Copyright Holders {#_copyright_holders}

The holder of the exclusive rights of copyright is referred to as the
owner in the Copyright Act.

The author of a computer program is the person who exercised control
over the making of the computer program[^946]. Copyright in software
vests in the person regarded as the author[^947] except when it vests in
the employer of the author because it is regarded as taking place in the
course of employment. Co-creators are joint-authors and usually
joint-owners. A computer program made *in the course of the author’s
employment* vests in the employer[^948]. This has been interpreted very
broadly. A person who was not employed to write code who nevertheless
wrote code using his own time and computer resources but who used the
code in his work duties, and modified it to be compatible with software
used by his employer and as requested by fellow employees was held by a
court to have acted in the course of his employment[^949]. The default
rule on employee created software may be modified by contract[^950]. The
statutory provision that copyright in a computer program made by an
employee vests in the employer does not apply to contractors. However
the definition of author as the person who exercise control over the
making of a program has been interpreted so that an independent
contractor who planned and wrote code was not regarded as the author,
instead the person who contracted him and decided how he wanted the
software modified was regarded as the author[^951]. One consequence is
that an independent contractor might be the author and owner of the
preparatory materials of a computer program and of literary, artistic,
musical and cinematographic outputs of a computer program while the
person who commissioned the contractor might be regarded as author and
owner of the computer program.

However when an independent contractor agrees to create a computer
program which is clearly specified beforehand and without further
instructions albeit periodic review then the independent contractor will
likely be the author[^952]. There is no statutory provision to enable
variation by agreement of the default rule that apart from employment
relationships the person deemed to be author is owner, however an
agreement to assign copyright in a computer program that hasn’t yet been
written is valid[^953].

Copyright in computer programs made under the direction or control of
the State or an international organization vests in the State or
international organization[^954]. Copyright in software that is produced
under the direction or control of South African government departments
vests in a state held company; the State Information Technology Agency
(Pty) Ltd.[^955]. If a literary, musical, artistic work or a computer
program is computer generated then the person who made the arrangements
for the creation of the work is regarded as the author [^956]. The
category of computer generated computer program is confined to machine
generated code and doesn’t include use of software tools such as editors
or compilers.

### Exclusive Rights {#_exclusive_rights_2}

According to section 11B of the Copyright Act the owner of copyright in
a computer program has the exclusive rights (following the sub-paragraph
designation in the Act) of: -

“(a) reproducing the computer program in any manner or form; (b)
publishing the computer program if it was hitherto unpublished[^957] (c)
performing the computer program in public; (d) broadcasting the computer
program; (e) causing the computer program to be transmitted in a
diffusion service, unless such service transmits a lawful broadcast,
including the computer program, and is operated by the original
broadcaster; (f) making an adaptation of the computer program; (g)
doing, in relation to an adaptation of the computer program, any of the
acts specified in relation to the computer program in paragraphs (a) to
(e) inclusive; (h) letting, or offering or exposing for hire by way of
trade, directly or indirectly, a copy of the computer program.”

Reproduction in any manner or form includes digital forms. Reproducing a
substantial portion of a computer program is regarded as reproduction
and the same approach is taken to all the exclusive rights[^958]. An
adaptation of a computer program is defined to include a version of the
program in a different programming language, code or notation different
or fixed in a different medium[^959]. Compiling or decompiling a program
is regarded as making an adaptation. An adaptation must itself be a
computer program, that is subject code or object code. An adaptation is
always regarded as also a reproduction.[^960]There is considerable
overlap between the definitions of reproduction and adaptation. Thus if
a user copies a computer program without significant modification he
will be regarded as having reproduced the program while if he modifies
it but retains a substantial portion then he will be regarded as having
both reproduced and adapted the program. Someone who creates an
adaptation may, absent use under an exception, require two licenses from
the rightsholder in the prior program, a license to reproduce and a
license to adapt. If the prior program has not been published then the
person creating the adaptation will also require a publication license
in order to distribute the program. An adaptation that is sufficiently
original will constitute an original computer program , even if it
infringes the first computer program [^961].

The output generated by a computer program that is discernible by the
public is not a computer program but rather a literary, artistic work,
cinematographic film or sound recording. Performance is defined by
reference to ‘any mode of visual or acoustic presentation’[^962]. It is
therefore not clear what amounts to performing a computer program in
public, especially if there is no output.

There is no specific right of distribution[^963].

### Exceptions to Exclusive Rights {#_exceptions_to_exclusive_rights_4}

Lawful possessors of computer programs can use the single exception
specific to computer programs to make copies reasonably necessary for
back up, exclusively for personal or private purposes. The copies must
be destroyed when possession of the computer program ceases to be
lawful[^964].

The Copyright Act lists a number of exceptions for literary and artistic
works. For each other category of work, including computer programs a
different selection from the list is applied, in so far as they can be
applied. For computer programs these include

-   fair dealing for purposes of criticism or review,

-   fair dealing in a broadcast or cinematographic film,

-   use in judicial proceedings,

-   quotation compatible with fair practice,

-   illustration for teaching compatible with fair practice,

-   reproduction in preparation for broadcast,

-   use in a broadcast where use in a cinematographic film has been
    authorized[^965].

Precisely how many of these exceptions apply in practise to computer
programs is unclear. The validity of provisions purporting to restrict
use of the exceptions has not been ruled on but they are likely to be
ruled invalid as ‘contra boni mores’ and defeating the purpose of
copyright legislation.

### Moral Rights {#_moral_rights_6}

Moral rights were introduced into South African copyright law in order
to comply with the Berne Convention, and there is no history nor legal
theory animating the rights. Computer programs are listed as one of the
type of works in which moral rights vest. The author of a computer
program has the moral rights, regardless of transfer of the copyright in
the program, to claim authorship of the computer program, and to object
to any distortion, mutilation or other modification prejudicial to his
honour or reputation but may not prevent changes absolutely necessary on
technical grounds or for the purpose of commercial exploitation[^966].
Even though the inclusion of clauses purporting to transfer or waiver
moral rights in copyright agreements is common practice there is no
provision enabling the assignment or waiver of moral rights in the
authorising legislation.

### Term of Protection {#_term_of_protection_4}

The same term applies to computer programs, cinematographic films and
photographs; fifty years. The fifty years is calculated from the end of
the year in which the computer program is first published or made
available to the public, or if neither has taken place then fifty years
from the making of the program.

### Copyright Assignment {#_copyright_assignment_4}

Copyright may be transferred by assignment or in a will [^967]. An
assignment or an exclusive license must be in writing and signed[^968].
The writing requirement can be met by a digital format[^969]. The
signature requirement can only be met by an ‘advanced digital signature’
facilitated by a registered provider[^970]. Any of the exclusive rights
can be assigned or licensed separately, and assignment can be limited to
a specific geographic area or to part of the copyright term.

Non exclusive licenses do not require any formalities and may be oral or
inferred from conduct but can be revoked at any time unless the non
exclusive license is granted by means of a contract which governs
revocation. It is not necessary for a license to use the term
irrevocable for it to be construed as irrevocable, however for a license
to be irrevocable it must be a contract, and whether it is irrevocable
will be depend on how the contract as a whole is construed. A contract
may specify in what circumstances, if any, a license may be
revoked[^971]. A contractual license may specify that it is irrevocable
except for breach, and allow for automatic termination on breach,
termination on notice and reinstatement. Generally a contract is created
in South African law when two or more persons with the power to contract
engage in conduct that demonstrates an intention to be legally bound.
Although usually analyzed as an ‘offer’ and an ‘acceptance’ all that is
required is an objective ‘consensus ad idem’; that is a meeting of the
minds apparent from conduct of the parties. Consideration is not
required to form a binding contract in the South African common law of
contract.

### Technical Protection Measures and Anti-Circumvention {#_technical_protection_measures_and_anti_circumvention}

There are no provisions defining technical protection measures or
prohibiting circumvention of technical protection measures in South
African copyright law. However provisions of the Electronic
Communications and Transactions Act 2003 may operate as
anti-circumvention measures[^972]. The Act creates a number of statutory
criminal offenses; intentionally accessing, or modifying, deleting or
de-activating data without authority or permission are criminal
offenses[^973]. A copyright license constitutes permission to access or
modify data, while accessing or modifying data that falls within a
copyright exception would be authorized. The definition of the offenses
is so vague that the provision may be unconstitutional. Production,
distribution and possession of a computer program designed primarily to
overcome security measures for the protection of data is also a criminal
offense.

### Enforcement {#_enforcement_2}

Copyright in a computer program is infringed by anyone who without
permission, and absent an exception, commits one of the acts reserved
for the copyright holder. Parallel import of copies of a program legally
available in other jurisdictions can also be infringing in certain
circumstances. Knowingly importing (other than for private and domestic
use), selling, letting, distributing for trade or acquiring a computer
program produced outside South Africa without the permission of the
rights holder in South Africa is also an infringement[^974]. As a result
of the requirement of knowledge a rightsholder who had authorized
production and distribution of a computer program outside South Africa
would thus have to give notice to recipients in South Africa of the
copies of the program legitimately produced elsewhere in order to render
future dealing with the copies infringing.

In addition to civil infringement of copyright certain commercial
activities have been criminalized. It is a criminal offense knowingly
and without permission from the copyright owner to:

-   make for sale or hire;

-   sell or let for hire;

-   exhibit in public by way of trade;

-   import into the Republic other than for private or domestic use;

-   distribute for purposes of trade or to such an extent so as to
    prejudice the owner;

infringing copies of a computer program. The owner of copyright in South
Africa may require the customs authorities to treat imported copyright
goods as prohibited goods[^975].

The Counterfeit Goods Act[^976] definition of counterfeiting includes
manufacturing, producing or making whether in South Africa or elsewhere
copyright infringing copies that are substantially identical to
copyright protected goods without the permission of the exclusive rights
holder in South Africa. Dealing in counterfeit goods is a criminal
offense, and alleged counterfeit goods may be seized by the police or
customs authorities.

Unprotected software and public domain software {#_unprotected_software_and_public_domain_software_3}
-----------------------------------------------

Computer programs are treated as a distinct category of work, defined as
instructions that direct the operation of a computer. Computer programs
are treated in a very similar way to cinematographic films, sound
recordings, broadcasts and programme carrying signals in respect of
authorship, terms and exclusive rights. Cinematographic films, sound
recordings, broadcasts and programme carrying signals are technical
works in which only the precise embodiment is protected. Abstract
aspects of these works are not protected by these categories although
they may be protected as literary, artistic or musical works. This
suggests that computer programs are also technical works and that
abstract aspects such as the architecture and the *look and feel* of a
program fall outside the definition of a computer program.

There is no provision in the copyright legislation that enables an
exclusive rights holder to dedicate a computer program to the public
domain. This does not mean that it is not possible to do so. South
African common law permits both abandonment of property, and waiver of
rights. Waiver of rights must take place through an unequivocal act by
the holder of the rights showing that he knew his rights and intended to
give them up. A written deed dedicating a computer program to the public
domain would seem to meet these criteria. Although a signature on the
deed would not be a formal requirement it would strongly indicate that a
rights holder knew he was giving up rights.

Analysis of FOSS under South African law {#_analysis_of_foss_under_south_african_law}
----------------------------------------

A user who made substantial changes to copyleft code would require a
license from the rightsholder of the first version of the code since
making the changes would be an adaptation and a copy of the first
version of the code. Although South African copyright law permits a bare
copyright license without requiring a contract, the only way to ensure
that a non-exclusive license is not revocable at will is through
incorporating the license in a contract that governs revocation[^977].
The general rule is that a person accepting an offer to contract must
communicate acceptance to the person making the offer. However it is
very well established that when the offer to contract itself sets out a
means of acceptance which does not require communication with the person
making the offer then acting in the manner prescribed constitutes
acceptance[^978]

FOSS licenses can therefore be construed as contracts; use of a computer
program as permitted by the FOSS license, and adherence to the
requirements of the license constitute acceptance sufficient to create a
binding agreement. Anyone who uses FOSS licensed software in a way which
requires copyright permission but does not adhere to the license has
thus failed to accept the offer constituted by the license, has no
permission and therefore, if an exception does not apply to the use,
infringes the copyright in the software. If a license contains a
copyleft clause then a user of the software would have to comply with
the copyleft clause, including sharing changes under the same or
equivalent license in order to properly accept the contract under which
he gained permission. Failure to comply with the copyleft clause would
vitiate the formation of a contract and thus render a non-compliant user
liable for copyright infringement. Alternatively if there were
sufficient initial compliance with the terms of the FOSS license to
evidence an intention to be bound by the license then the terms of the
license would govern a breach.

It is not necessary to construe adherence to the terms of a FOSS license
as constituting consideration.

### Copyrights {#_copyrights_4}

When two or more authors collaborate to produce a computer program in
which contributions of each author are not separable from the
contribution of others the result is regarded as jointly authored. If
the results are separable, for example modules of a program, then each
constitutes a computer program for legal purposes even if it cannot
function without the other modules. The issue is not whether parts can
function separately but whether the contribution of skill, effort and
judgement of an author can be distinguished from others. The unique
definition of author of a computer program in South African copyright
law may make issues of joint authorship in FOSS projects less
problematic than in other jurisdictions since the author is regarded as
the person who exercises control over the making of the program, as a
result only someone with commit authority in a FOSS project can be
regarded as an author. If a project is set up so that a few contributors
are each responsible for a module or modules then each module may be
regarded as a separate program authored by that contributor.
Contributers of only a few lines of code will not be regarded as
authors. Only those who have authority to decide what is included in a
version of a program, or portion of a program will be authors.

The definition of authorship does however pose problems for FOSS in two
situations. Computer programmers who customize FOSS which they have
created for use in their workplaces run a risk that a court may regard
their work as vesting in their employers. The risk can be reduced by
contributors who are employees using FOSS without modification in their
workplaces or alternatively by stipulating clearly in employment
agreements that code shall be open source. Independent contractors who
customize FOSS for clients also face a risk that the client will be
regarded as having exercised control over the making of the computer
program and will be regarded as the author. Independent contractors
wishing to avoid that outcome should carefully limit the control
exercised by the client and in any case require agreement that whatever
code is written shall be distributed under the chosen FOSS license
regardless of who owns it.

Later versions of a FOSS program and forked FOSS code are reproductions
for as long as they contain substantial portions of the originating
program. They are also adaptations of the originating program, but only
if they can be regarded as including a substantial portion of the
originating program.

#### Assignment of copyrights {#_assignment_of_copyrights}

Assignment of copyright in a FOSS contributor’s agreement, such as the
agreement used by the Free Software Foundation will require a paper copy
be made and mailed, not because electronic documents are invalid but
because only a paper and ink signature or an advanced electronic
signature provided by a provider registered in South Africa will meet
the signature requirement for a valid copyright assignment. Use of
advanced electronic signatures is not widespread. On the other hand a
contributor to a FOSS project can agree to a contributor agreement which
grants non exclusive rights or licenses work directly under a FOSS
license online where the contributor agreement or license is recorded
digitally.

### Moral Rights {#_moral_rights_7}

A contributor to a FOSS project has moral rights to the computer program
he has created. The right to object to modification does not extend to
changes that are absolutely necessary for functioning. Beyond that the
precise ambit of the moral rights as they apply to computer programs and
whether they can be waived is not clear. However the nature of the work
being created will influence what constitutes appropriate
acknowledgement of the right of authorship and what constitutes a
modification contrary to the author’s honour. FOSS is by its nature a
co-operative co-creation in which contributors agree concerning
acknowledgement and what changes others may make through either
contributor agreements or licences before committing code. It is
therefore unlikely that a South African court would find copying and
adaptations compliant with those commitments to infringe moral rights.

### Enforcing FOSS Licences {#_enforcing_foss_licences}

#### Parties to License {#_parties_to_license}

The license must be issued by the owner or a licensee authorised to
issue a FOSS license. In FOSS projects the owner is usually the author
or authors, that is those contributors with authority to decide what is
in a release version and their predecessors.

#### Contract {#_contract}

Rather than claiming breach of contract an author would simply claim
copyright infringement, the alleged infringer would have to demonstrate
compliance with the terms of the license in order to show acceptance of
the basis of permission. Alternatively if the user of the program
demonstrated sufficient initial compliance with the license so that the
creation of a contract must be inferred then the provisions of the
license as a contract apply. If the license, such as the GNU GPL
provides for automatic termination on breach then the license will be
terminated by breach and further use will be infringing. If a user has
demonstrated acceptance of the terms of a FOSS license which makes no
provision for revocation but the user subsequently does not comply with
the license the licensor may experience difficulties obtaining a court
order requiring compliance with the other terms of the contract because
South African courts prefer to award damages for breach of contract,
rather than enforce performance of agreements.

#### Violation of License Terms {#_violation_of_license_terms}

Generally failure to adhere to the conditions of the license indicates a
refusal of the license construed as a contractual offer and thus no
contract is formed, a copier is then liable for copyright infringement.

### Waiver and Liability {#_waiver_and_liability_5}

There is no requirement arising from copyright legislation or common law
that a person providing FOSS provide any warranty in respect of the
software nor does any warranty arise automatically under copyright
legislation or common law. Disclaimers and limitations of liability are
valid under general principles of contract. However disclaimers and
limitations of liability in favour of third parties cannot take effect
unless one of the parties to the agreement accepts the benefit of the
limitation on behalf of the third party. This usually takes place
through a *stipulatio alteri* a provision in an agreement that a
specified third party will enjoy a specified benefit, and that one of
the parties will accept the benefit of behalf of the third party. For
example a software vendor which holds a sub-license to software may
include in an agreement with a customer a disclaimer of liability on
part of the software creator which is not party to the agreement; the
vendor would accept the benefit of the disclaimer on behalf of the
software creator. A limitation of liability which can be construed as a
unilateral waiver will not require acceptance of the benefit on behalf
of the third party.

FOSS licenses do not fall under consumer protection legislation. However
a transaction in which a service provider delivered goods and services
to a natural person that included FOSS for consideration in the course
of business would be subject to consumer protection legislation.

Cases {#_cases}
-----

There have been no reported cases as yet (June 2014).

### Legal Procedures {#_legal_procedures}

Only an owner or exclusive licensor can enforce the exclusive rights of
copyright[^979]. An owner can claim an interdict [^980], damages, or
reasonable royalties and delivery up of infringing copies[^981]. If a
work was joint-authored all the joint-authors must agree to an
enforcement action for reasonable royalties or damages[^982] because no
rights holder is entitled to all of the damages. A joint-author may
therefore apply for an interdict without the consent of the other
joint-authors. Joint-authors can enter into an agreement that specifies
what percentage of the profits from the computer program each is
entitled to which would enable a joint-author to begin legal proceedings
for his share of damages without the agreement of joint authors. A
defendant could himself join the other joint-authors to the proceedings.

A rights holder who has grounds to suspect copyright infringement and
that the suspected infringer is likely to dispose of the evidence of the
infringement may apply to court, without the alleged infringer being
given an opportunity to oppose the application, for an order authorizing
the seizure and safe keeping of the evidence pending its production in
litigation[^983]. Damages will not be awarded against someone who proves
that there were no reasonable grounds for suspecting that copyright
subsisted in a computer program[^984].

Whether a substantial portion of a computer program has been copied is a
qualitative question, a few dozen lines of code out of thousands may
constitute a substantial portion if they solve a particularly difficult
problem or are crucial in some other way to the functioning of the
program[^985].

### Literature {#_literature}

Jeremy Speres: ‘The Enforceability of Open Source Software Licences: Can
Copyright Licences Be Granted Non-Contractually?’ South African
Mercantile Law Journal (2009) Vol 21, Number 2, 174

Spain {#chap.spain}
=====

author:\[Bain,Malcolm\]

Introduction to software protection under Spanish law {#sec_spain_introduction}
-----------------------------------------------------

### Body of law {#sec_spain_body}

Copyright protection of software is regulated in Spain under Royal
Legislative Decree 1/1996 of 12 April, approving the consolidated text
of the Copyright Act (hereinafter, the “Copyright Act”)[^986]. This law
transposes the EU Copyright Directives (Directive 2001/29/EC on the
harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright and related rights in the
information society, Directive 2004/48/EC on the enforcement of
intellectual property rights; Directive 96/9/EC on the legal protection
of databases; and, in particular, Council Directive 91/250/EEC of 14 May
1991 on the Legal Protection of Computer Programs — hereinafter referred
to as the “Software Directive”).

Title VII of Book I of the Copyright Act (Articles 95-104) specifically
regulates copyright in computer programs. These provisions are
considered *lex specialis* with respect to the general provisions of
Copyright Act, as *lex generalis*.[^987] This means that the general
provisons of the Copyright Act will apply to computer programs to the
extent that Book I, Title VII does not contain any specific provisions.

### Object of protection {#sec_spain_Objectofprotection}

Computer programs are specifically included in the non-exhaustive list
of literary, artistic and scientific works protected by copyright, in
Article 10.1(i). Computer programs are defined in Article 96 as “any
sequence of instructions or indications destined to be used directly or
indirectly in a computer system to performe a function or task or obtain
a determined result, whatsoever its form of expression or fixation”, and
include their preparatory material. Computer Program copyright
protection is also extended to technical documentation and user manuals.
Only original computer programs benefit copyright protection[^988].
According to Article 96.2 of the Copyright Act, the computer program
needs to be the own intellectual creation of the author, which has led
authors and judges to hold that the work must be new and bear, in some
manner, the print of the author’s persona (which, in computer
programming, does not have to be a high level at all)[^989]. The ideas
and principles behind computer programs including those which serve as
the basis for its interfaces are explicitly denied copyright
protection[^990]. Malware such as computer viruses, is also excluded
from protection.

### Authors/Beneficiaries {#sec_spain_AuthorsBeneficiaries}

The Copyright Act generally provides that copyrights in a work belong to
the author, who is the person or group of persons who creates the
work[^991]. In respect of computer programs, Article 97.4 adds, however,
that where computer programs are created by one or more employees in the
execution of their duties or following the instructions given by their
employer, the employer will be deemed to be the exclusive rightsholder
of the economic rights in the computer programs so created, unless
expressly provided otherwise[^992]. In these circumstances, employee
authors will maintain their moral rights over the work (see below),
while the economic rights belong — by legislated automatic transmission
of rights — to the employer[^993].

The law also provides for works with multiple authors. Joint works
(works that are the unique result of the collaborative efforts of a
variety of persons) are the property of all the authors and the rights
correspond to them as they may agree. In default, the rights are held
equally. Each author may exploit his/her contribution to the work,
provided this exploitation does not prejudice exploitation of the work
as a whole[^994].

The rights over a “collective work” — a program created by initiative
and under the coordination of a person that edits and disseminates it
(an “editor”, basically), and consisting in the composition of several
contributions (made for this purpose by different authors) which merge
into a single and unique work --- without being able to attribute
ownership rights to one author in particular — belong to the editor,
unless contractually provided otherwise[^995].

Finally, the Copyright Act also establises the concept of a “composed”
or “composite” work, being a work which incorporates one or more
previously existing works without the colaboration of the prior author.
Rights in the composed work belong to the person who performs such
composition, without prejudice to the rights of (and the need for
authorisation from) the prior author[^996].

### Economic rights {#sec_spain_Economicrights}

According to Article 99 of the Copyright Act, the economic rights in
computer programs comprise the exclusive rights to perform or authorise
the performance of :

\(a) permanent or temporary reproduction of a computer program by any
means and in any form, in part or in whole (including when the acts of
loading, executing, displaying, transmission and storage of the program
require a reproduction);

\(b) translation, adaptation, arrangement or alteration of a computer
program, and the reproduction of any such transformed work; and

\(c) any form of distribution to the public, including the rental, of the
original computer program or copies thereof.

Article 99 does not mention the right of public communication (e.g.
transmission of a program in intangible form via Internet), however as
the other provisions of the Copyright Act apply in the absence of
specific provision, it is understood that Article 20 of the Copyright
Act grants the rightsholders the exclusive right to publicly communicate
the computer program.

### Exceptions to exclusive rights {#sec_spain_ExceptionstoExclusiveRights}

Article 99, last paragraph, expressly provides that the first sale in
the European Union of a copy of a program by the rightholder or with his
consent shall exhaust the distribution right of that copy within the
Community, with the exception of the right to control further rental of
the program or a copy thereof. This is understood to apply only to
tangible copies (i.e. programs on a CD or DVD, flashcard, etc.), as the
distribution right is limited to the computer programs in tangible
media.[^997] And it does not exhaust the reprodution and transformation
rights.

The other exceptions are set out in Article 100 of the Copyright Act:

\(1) In the absence of specific contractual provisions, no authorisation
by the rightholder is required for reproduction or transformation of a
computer program that are necessary for its use by the lawful user in
accordance with its intended purpose, including error correction.

\(2) Reproduction by way of a back-up copy of a computer program by a
person having a right to use it may not be prevented, insofar as that
copy is necessary to use the program.

\(3) A person having a right to use a copy of a computer program is
entitled, without the authorisation of the rightholder, to observe,
study or test the functioning of the program in order to determine the
ideas and principles which underlie any element of the program, provided
he/she does so while lawfully performing any of the acts of loading,
displaying, running, transmitting or storing the program.

This article basically restates the three exceptions of Article 5 of the
Software Directive.

Articles 100.5-100.7 of the Copyright Act explain in detail the
circumstances in which a legitimate user of a computer program may
reproduce and/or translate a computer program without the prior
authorisation of the rightsholder, in order to obtain the information
necessary to achieve the interoperability of an independently created
computer program with other programs[^998].

The Act expressly provides that these exceptions, except that set out in
Article 100.1 (reproduction and transformation necessary for use) are
compulsory law. Hence, contractual provisions to the contrary are deemed
not to be valid. However, the exercise of these statutory rights is
often difficult in practice because the licensee generally has no access
to the source code of the application and it is not obvious to enforce
this access legally.

### Moral rights {#sec_spain_moralrights}

The Copyright Act makes no mention of moral rights in relation to
computer programs. These are regulated by Article 14 of the Act, which
is understood to apply to computer programs like any other protected
work[^999]. These rights include the paternity right and the right to
oppose modifications and applications which might affect the honor or
reputation of the author[^1000]. These rights are inaliable and
unwaivable[^1001], and remain in force following the death of the
author.

### Term of protection {#sec_spain_Termofprotection}

Article 98 of the Copyright Act provides that the same term of copyright
applies to computer programs as for general protected works: 70 years
following the 1st January after the death of the author. For juridical
persons holding rights (employers or rightsholder in a collective work),
the term is 70 years from the 1st January of the year after first
legitimate public dissemination of the program (or its creation, if it
is not published)[^1002].

Rights in a co-authored (joint) work last until 70 years after the death
of the last co-author. As regards collective works, having a unique
rightsholder (the editor), the copyrights last for 70 years after first
legal publication of the work. However, if the natural authors are
mentioned in the published versions, rights in the work have the same
general term: life (or dissemination) plus 70 years.

### Copyright assignment {#sec_spain_Copyrightassignment}

Economic rights in computer programs may be transferred to third
parties, *mortis causa* or *inter vivos*[^1003]. This is done by
operation of law in the case of employee created works, as we have seen
above. Otherwise, all *inter vivos* transfers must be formalised in
writing (paper or electronic)[^1004]. The transfer of rights is limited
to the specific rights, use, term and geographic scope stated in the
contract/license. If the contract does not state these terms, transfers
are deemed non-exclusive, for 5 years, for the country where the
transfer is made, and only for the purposes that are necessarily deduced
from the contract and necessary for fulfilling its purpose.

If there is no contract for the transfer of rights, no rights are
transfered.[^1005] However, in the case of commissioned works (e.g. from
consultant programmers), the commissioner will have a limited use right,
limited in the same manner as above: having only such rights as are
necessarily deduced from the circumstances of the engagement, and
necessary for fulfilling its purpose[^1006]. In addition, depending on
the degree of participation of the commissioning party (client) (e.g.
providing the program design and detailed specifications), one could
consider the resulting work to be either a collective work, for which
the client is rights holder *ab initio* as editor of the work, or even a
collaborative work in which the client is co-author.

Transfers of rights can be exclusive or non-exclusive. There is no such
concept as “assignment” or “sale” of all the rights or copyright
property to a third party (this is contradictory to the concept of moral
rights)[^1007]. The closest transfer to an “assignment” is an
irrevocable, exclusive transfer or license of all the rights, for all
purposes, for all the duration of the rights and all the countries of
the world.

Exclusive transfers must be expressly stated as such, and may be for
one, several or all the copyright rights. The exclusive licensee may
grant non-exclusive licences to third parties, and also has legal
standing to defend the rights in court, independently from the original
rightsholder. The exclusive licensee must also exploit the work, or lose
its license.

The Copyright Act establishes specifically that, unless proof is
provided to the contrary, the granting of any use license will be
considered non-exclusive and non-transferable, only for the purpose of
satisfying the needs of the user[^1008]. Non-exclusive rights may not be
onwards-transfered, nor sub-licensed.

Copyright transfers may be royalty bearing or for free. This issue is
independent of the rights that are granted. Payments may be one-off, or
a proportional participation in the profits of exploitation of the work
(royalties)[^1009].

### Copyright enforcement {#sec_spain_Copyrightenforcement}

Article 102 of the Copyright Act establishes the terms of breach of
copyright: the unauthorised performance of any exclusive rights
(reproduction, transformation, distribution, public communication), and
in particular:

\(a) the commercialisation (putting into circulation) of any copies of a
program which the marketer knows or could be deemed to know are illegal

\(b) the possession for commercial purposes of any such copies

\(c) the commercialisation or possession for commercial purposes of tools
which are exclusively aimed at facilitating the unlawful removal or
avoidance of technical means which protect the computer program
(TPMs)[^1010].

This latter provision (Article 102(c)) is specifically aimed at
protecting DRM and technical protection measures, and it was not
considered necessary to change these provision in 2004 or 2006 to
implement the EU Copyright Directives. Criminal law also penalises any
copyright infringement for commercial purposes (“for profit” motive),
with specific emphasis on removing TPMs[^1011].

Unprotected software and public domain software {#sec_spain_Unprotectedsoftwareandpublicdomainsoftware}
-----------------------------------------------

As set forth above, only software that is original in the sense that it
is an intellectual creation of the author benefits copyright protection.
Non-original software does not come into consideration for copyright
protection and can, in principle, be used freely. Due to the functional
nature of many programs, the degree of originality for software is not
considered to have to be particularly high, and basically a subjective
criteria: of being the result of personal effort that is not copied from
another work, is sufficient[^1012].

Under Spanish law, public domain is limited to works for which the
copyrights have expired[^1013]. This software — if there is any
today! — can be used, reproduced or executed freely, without permission
or the payment of a fee. It can in certain cases even be presented by
third parties as their own work, and by modifying the original work,
third parties can take certain versions of the public domain software
out of the public domain again.

FOSS under Spanish law {#sec_spain_FOSSunderSpanishLaw}
----------------------

From a conceptual and legal point of view, FOSS is like any other
computer program, and benefits from the protection granted by copyright
law. Spanish copyright law fully supports the rights of the copyright
holder (usually the author) to establish determined conditions in the
software license, having the exclusive right to exercise or authorise
the exercise of the rights of reproduction, transformation and
distribution (and public communication). So, save for public policy
prohibitions, a rightsholder is free to choose the conditions under
which he or she licenses a computer program to third parties.

Under Spanish law, FOSS would be considered as software to which users
generally have more rights, via the FOSS license agreement, than they
would have with a proprietary or “non-free” software license[^1014].
And, like any other software license, the FOSS license conditions must
be respected by the licensee (user), or the license permissions may be
revoked.

### Copyright issues {#sec_spain_Copyrightissues}

#### Multiple authorship {#_multiple_authorship}

Although FOSS can be written by one person or be owned by one legal
entity[^1015], generally speaking, after some time it is extended,
improved, corrected and generally transformed, becoming the result of
the work of several authors who can make claims to it. The question is
whether later additions create a collaborative work (a work created by
collaborating authors), or whether the original software is the work and
every contribution created during the further development of the
software, a derivative or composed work. The legal consequences are
different.

#### Qualification of FOSS {#_qualification_of_foss_8}

For FOSS to be a work created by means of a collaborative process, i.e.
to be considered a “collaborative work” of co-authors, it is not
necessary for every co-author to have contributed equally[^1016] (rarely
the case), nor are co-authors required to work on it at the same time
(in most cases, not the case) although to be considered an author the
contributor must intervene during the creative process (i.e not a tester
or non-substantial bug-fixer). However, to be a co-author, the
contribution needs to be worthy of protection by copyright. The provider
of an idea is not a co-author, nor is the person who corrects a
technical error or merely follows instructions[^1017].

Whereas the first version of a software program, if written by several
people, can in many cases be qualified as a collaborative work
(co-authorship), this seems much less the case for the later versions,
which are based on the original work without, however, there being any
“consultation” or direct collaboration between the authors. These later
versions would be qualified as “derivative works”, or possibly
collective works (if the author/editor of the new version collated a
series of different programs to form a distinct new software based on
the original). Therefore, in terms of the legal consequences, a
distinction needs to be made between the rights of the original
co-authors and the rights of subsequent authors who carry out work based
on the original.

#### Rights of the original co-authors {#_rights_of_the_original_co_authors_6}

Co-authorship usually concerns the creation of a single “unique” work
that is more than the collection of its component parts[^1018]. The
contributions may be indivisible, i.e. each individual contribution is
not clearly identifiable, e.g. when two authors write a text together.
But it is not necessarily the case: under Spanish law there may be
co-authorship even when the several components are distinguishable, but
brought together in a single work in which all the authors are involved
--- what one may call “horizontal” collaboration[^1019].

As we have seen above, in the case of collaborative works, the authors
are free to regulate the exercise of the copyrights by agreement.
Co-authors can agree how the program is made public (e.g. under a FOSS
license) and how decisions regarding the copyrights are made, e.g. by
normal or special majorities, or give one of them the right to make all
decisions regarding this work. They can also reach an agreement as to
the economic rights, such as royalty payments, and moral rights e.g.
under whose name the work will be published[^1020].

If the co-authors have not reached an agreement, neither of the authors
is allowed to exercise the copyright separately, however each may
exploit his/her own contribution separately if this exploitation does
not prejudice exploitation of the work as a whole. So if a programmer
wishes to use his or her contribution in another manner, this will be
possible, provided this does not create, for example, a competing
product. In the absence of agreement, unanimity is required for
decisions, and in the absence of unanimity the court decides, and the
court will decide according to the provisions of the Civil Code in
relation joint properties[^1021] (which usually means a majority rule,
and by default contributions are deemed equal unless proof to the
contrary is provided). The court will also weigh different factors to be
taken into account, including good faith, the degree of collaboration,
the degree of substitution of the different contributions, etc.[^1022]

As each author has the right to exploit his/her contribution, it is
clear that he/she may, in his/her name and without intervention of the
other authors, institute legal proceedings for an infringement of
copyright in the work, and in her contribution. This is clear in so far
as such proceedings are for an injunction to end the
infringement[^1023]. What is not so clear is the right to individual
compensation and it is thought that for these cases, the consent of the
co-authors is required (see above). However, in some cases the lack of
unanimity may result in the inadmissibility of this claim, e.g. if heirs
of a programmer are unable to agree as to whether to institute a
claim[^1024].

#### Authors of derivative / composed FOSS works {#_authors_of_derivative_composed_foss_works}

After some time FOSS will, in most cases, be a derivative work of the
original or a composed work which includes it. Derivative works and
composed works are works which reproduce parts or characteristics of the
original work, and in which the new authors bring an original
contribution (thus creating a new work) by way of transformation or
composition of the orignal. The author(s) of the derivative or composed
work hold independent and full copyright rights in the new work. They
are, however, restricted because the derivative or composed work cannot
be exploited without the consent of the holder of the copyright on the
original work. Under FOSS licenses this consent is not a problem,
subject to respecting the terms and conditions (e.g. regarding further
distribution of the derivative work)[^1025]. This issue gives rise to
certain difficulties as it is not always clear if the use of the
previous work is by way of mere reproduction (or compilation into a new
work), or by transformation of the previous work — depending on the FOSS
licenses, different conditions may apply. This may be key to
understanding the impact of copyleft obligations in the GPL (v2 or v3).

#### The management of copyrights in FOSS — transfers? {#_the_management_of_copyrights_in_foss_8201_8212_8201_transfers}

In order to manage copyrights in FOSS better, it may be useful to
collect all copyrights concerning a FOSS project within one person or
organisation. The existence of this organisation will simplify the
management and enforcement of the (eventually joint) copyrights[^1026].
The collective management of copyrights is perfectly possible under
Spanish law, and is usually, but not necessarily, regulated by an
exclusive license or transfer of copyrights to the person or
organisation in question. As an alternative, the rightsholders may
authorise an organisation to take legal action in respect of their
work — as a fiduciary, the party to whom the legitimation is granted
shall not act for himself but on account of others who have so
authorised him/her (being the current rightsholders)[^1027].

### Moral copyrights {#sec_spain_Moralcopyrights}

Generally speaking, FOSS originated in the United States, and FOSS
licensing tends to attach less importance to the question of moral
rights of the author[^1028], however it must be noted that one common
factor among all FOSS licenses is the obligation to maintain attribution
to the original authors, and indicate any modifications — a contractual
form of guaranteeing certain moral rights (paternity and integrity).

The Open Source Definition specifies that the author of software
distributed under a FOSS license cannot oppose the use of the software
by certain people and groups[^1029] or for certain areas of
application[^1030]. This runs contrary to the moral rights of an author
with respect to the uses to be made of his/her work. It is clear under
Spanish law that an author is not able to give up his/her moral rights
in his/her work[^1031]: any waiver to exercise in the future one’s moral
rights is void, including moral rights on software[^1032]. The author of
a work distributed under the FOSS license should theoretically therefore
be able to oppose any use of his/her work by people or groups or for
certain purposes which affect his honour or reputation, based on his/her
moral rights.

Moral rights are also carried through to derivative works: the author of
the original work will therefore, based on his/her moral rights, not
only be able to oppose the use by third parties of his work, but also
the use of derivative works which affect his/her honour or reputation.

### Enforcing FOSS licenses {#sec_spain_EnforcingFOSSlicenses}

The question whether a FOSS license can be enforced under the Spanish
legal system depends on whether a valid license has been granted. The
essential questions are: (i) between whom is a license reached, (ii) has
the license been validly reached and (iii) what are its terms?

Another dimension to this debate is whether a FOSS license can only be
considered a contract (requiring formalisation as such: an offer and its
acceptance, being a manifestation of consent to be bound by the terms,
often absent in FOSS practice), or seen as merely conditions to an
authorisation or form of donation (donation not of the software, but of
the non-exclusive rights to use them). Doctrine in Spain generally holds
that copyright licenses are contracts[^1033], although there may be
scope in Spanish law for arguing against the need to prove the
requisites of a contract, and merely defend the instrument as
establishing the conditions to be applied to the authorisation to use
the software (breach of which gives rise to a mere breach of
copyrights).

Note however that it will not be in the interest of the licensee to
prove that a license has not been granted (whether by contract or
otherwise), as by default the law provides that third parties may not
exercise any exploitation rights without due authorisation (or
eventually, if a license can be deemed, the licensee’s use rights are de
minimis use rights provided by law: those necessary for fulfilling the
purpose of a contract). So from a licensee’s point of view, there is no
point in attacking the existence of the license, but, should there be
any conflict, rather the validity and scope/interpretation of the terms.

#### License parties {#_license_parties}

If a rightsholder makes his/her work available under a FOSS license, the
answer as to parties is usually clear: the license is reached between
the rightsholder and the licensee. In case of several co-authors, the
situation may be more complicated, and the question as to with whom the
licensee reaches a contract depends on the mutual agreement between the
co-authors[^1034].

Often, a FOSS program will be the work of several authors who did not
work in joint collaboration. After all, FOSS is usually created via a
chain of authors who all contribute to the creation of the program that
is, in the end, licensed to the user/licensee. In so far as each new
author makes an original contribution to the work, a derivative work is
produced[^1035]. The licensee of the eventual work will need to have the
consent of every author in the chain who made an original contribution
to the final work, starting with the author of the first work or
version. This consent can be direct, or indirect by giving consent in
the FOSS license to the next author to modify and distribute the work
(verbatim or as modified).

Insofar as an “editor” (such as Red Hat or Novell) collates different
FOSS works into a new package, a collective work may be created, and the
licensee will have a license from, and need the consent of, the
editor — who in turn will have to manage the upstream licenses.

Most FOSS licenses solve this by creating binding conditions between the
licensee and all authors in the chain. GPL version 3, for instance,
contains the following clause: “Each time you convey a covered work, the
recipient automatically receives a license from the original licensors,
to run, modify and propagate that work, subject to this License”[^1036]
and GPL version 2: “each time you redistribute the Program (or any work
based on the Program), the recipient automatically receives a license
from the original licensor”[^1037].

In this way the user of the software obtains a license of all authors in
the chain. This chain of licenses is valid under Spanish law, and it is
argued that it must be this way, as non-exclusive licensees (the
intermediate creators, in the chain) are not entitled to relicense or
sublicense the original work.

#### Validity of the license — as a contract or otherwise {#_validity_of_the_license_8201_8212_8201_as_a_contract_or_otherwise}

Contracts in Spanish law require an offer and acceptance of the offer by
way of a manifestation of a consent to be bound by the terms of the
offer[^1038]. Conventional IT agreements are reached by the explicit
acceptance of the terms and conditions by the licensee through signing
the terms and conditions, by opening the packaging, by clicking or
selecting an “I agree” button, or indeed by any other action from which
acceptance can be deduced. These methods to reach a licensing agreement
have been sufficiently tried and tested and, at least between commercial
parties, are generally considered to be valid[^1039].

Typically, in a FOSS environment, however, software is made available
with the simple specification on a website (“licensed under the GPLv2
license”) or in the source code of the software itself (in the code file
header and with luck, in a “COPYING.txt” file or a `/legal/` folder).
The license is not usually required to be explicitly accepted, nor are
the terms presented to the licensee/user. Having to click and confirm
every time could in some cases interfere with the use of the
software[^1040]. In addition, the Open Source Definition opposes
demanding explicit agreement to the license conditions with the aim of
confirming the agreement between licensor and licensee[^1041].

The question is double: whether in these cases a valid license has been
entered into, and what are the applicable terms. The answer to the first
question must be affirmative. The reason is that the user of a copyright
protected work needs to be able to indicate the grounds on which he/she
is authorised to use the work. As we have seen, using software without
the rightsholder’s consent implies a copyright infringement. This
implies that everyone who wants to use software which they find via the
internet, needs to actively look for a license. If the user cannot prove
he/she has a license[^1042], he/she must refrain from using it.

The trouble is that, without having had an opportunity to review the
terms and thus consent to them (and, sometimes in the case of FOSS, the
rightsholder not properly indicating the applicable terms, if any, other
than stating that the software is “free software”), the licensee may be
in a position to argue that certain terms are not applicable or part of
the agreement. Against this, the licensor would generally argue that, in
the absence of proof to the contrary, the FOSS license conditions are
the only terms under which he or she licenses the FOSS, and thus if the
user now disagrees to any of the terms, then the licensor has granted no
license to the licensee and any use of the software is thus a breach of
copyright. Furthermore, Spanish courts would look, in the professional
sector, at the uses and customs in the sector, to determine if
sufficient opportunity was granted to read and accept the terms, and it
is now fairly well established that free software licensing terms are
available to be read in the source code or on the project website, and
most software developers know and apply this custom. Accordingly, as
regards professional developers who are FOSS licensees, it would be very
difficult to argue that there was no binding license between the
parties, or that the terms are unknown[^1043].

As we have noted above, it is doubtful whether any user would benefit
from disputing the existence of a FOSS license (except with regard to
disclaimers, for which see below). If the user disputes the conclusion
or validity of the FOSS license, this implies that no legally valid
copyright license was granted and the user therefore is not allowed to
use the software at all.

#### Violation of license conditions {#_violation_of_license_conditions_2}

Breach of a FOSS license by a user/licensee could constitute a double
infringement in Spain: contractual breach of binding license
obligations, and breach of copyrights of the rightsholder. The
rightsholder may take action in civil courts under both claims (and due
to the possibility of arguing against the existence or need for a
contract, it would be recommended to sue on both grounds). In addition,
breach of copyright provides several interesting remedies[^1044].

### Disclaimers and liability {#sec_spain_Disclaimersandliability}

Typically, FOSS licenses contain very strong disclaimer clauses, which
attempt to discharge the author from all liability[^1045]. The argument
given for this is that FOSS is often made available without a fee, as a
result of which the author/rightsholder generates insufficient income to
pay for liability insurance and legal costs[^1046].

Although this reasoning is certainly valid for the amateur programmer,
it applies much less for professional programmers who build their
business model around FOSS[^1047]. To cover the eventuality of being
held liable for a warranty of title or quality, professional suppliers
of FOSS or related services often provide guarantees and technical
support[^1048].

Article 1902 of the Spanish Civil Code provides for strict liability and
indemnities for wilful misconduct (“culpa”) or negligence
(“negligencia”) in an extra-contractaul context (i.e. tort, including
breach of copyrights), as does Article 1101 for contractual liability.
Damages for wilful misconduct may not be excluded at all, and those
caused by negligence are subject to review by the courts. Liability
under these provisions would apply both in the context of any problem
with relation to title (copyright in the code) or quality of the
software. In addition, with respect to quality, suppliers in a
commercial relationship are liable to repair damages caused by hidden
defects (Articles 1461 and 1484 Civil Code).

More specifically as regards title, although in Spanish law there is no
such concept as a “warranty of title”, it is implicit that a licensor
must have sufficient rights to be able to grant a FOSS license — in
absence of which, the supplier will not only be in breach of the third
party’s copyright (and thus, in breach of the obligation to ensure the
licensee’s right of quite enjoyment[^1049]) but also liable under the
aforementioned provisions relating to fraud or negligence.

However, between professionals, the law allows parties to regulate
liability (except for fraud, and even negligence may not be wholely
excluded), for example limiting damages to the price paid for software
or establishing a process for maintenance and bug correction. In all
circumstances, the courts will look at the balance of rights and
obligations between the parties, in which case for FOSS significant
weight may be given to the free (gratis) nature of FOSS, as well as the
wide scope of rights granted to the licensee, as a balance against the
wide disclaimers.

It is doubtful whether the exoneration clauses or disclaimers contained
in FOSS licenses comply in full with the general validity requirements
under Spanish law, especially in relation to a consumer licensee. These
requirements include that the clauses are not against the principle of
good faith, do not upset the balance of obligations and rights between
the parties, and are not subject to the unilateral discretion of one
party (the licensor). Thus it will depend on each circumstance whether
the disclaimer clauses will be seen as valid or not: the drafting of the
clause, the balance of the parties, the knowledge and experience of the
licensee, etc. When the disclaimer does not include the now-standard
expression “to the extent permitted by mandatory applicable law” (as in
the BSD or MIT License), the clause may be struck out as invalid, in
part or in whole, as contradictory to the aforementioned provisions of
the Civil Code (if not also consumer protection laws, see below). It is
also important to look at how the licensor presents the product
(differentiating, for example, system libraries or components, such as
MySQL, and end-user products such as Firefox or the GIMP). For a product
that is presented as finished and ready for use, the exoneration clause
will be considered invalid much more easily, than for a product for
which the licensor clearly formulated a reservation[^1050].

In so far as the aforementioned conditions have been complied with,
exoneration provisions will be enforceable in principle, unless the
stipulating party could be considered as a professional seller in a
relationship with a consumer purchaser[^1051]. As mentioned above,
professional sellers are required to repair hidden defects in the
products they sell, except if the purchaser is a specialist in the
sector, under Article 1484 of the Spanish Civil Code. Contractual
provisions may modify this, if they are validly incorporated in the
contract and not invalidated for other reasons (see above, and in
particular by consumer protection laws). If the hidden defects are
known, and this state is not declared to the purchaser, then the
supplier will be liable not only to repair the defect but also for
damages and interest[^1052]. The professional seller of FOSS may
therefore be liable in principle, unless he can provide proof of his
ignorance of the bugs/mistakes. In practice while this proof will be
hard to provide (through due diligence in testing, programming process
and methodology, etc), take into account that it is generally accepted
that software is buggy and virtually impossible to make perfectly.

Finally, these disclaimers will usually be held invalid with respect to
consumer users, both due to the scope of the disclaimers (being deemed
abusive[^1053]) and due to the fact that a consumer in Spain would not
be expected to be able to understand a disclaimer in English (the
language of most FOSS licenses) and thus held not to be incorporated in
the consumer contract. On the other hand, it could be argued that as
there is no commercial relationship between the parties (and thus, the
licensor is not a “seller” of a product), then consumer protection law
may not apply to the full extent[^1054]. This argument is reinforced by
the free (gratis) nature of most FOSS.

### The copyleft principle {#sec_spain_Thecopyleftprinciple}

#### Principle {#_principle_8}

A characteristic found in several (but not all[^1055]) FOSS licenses is
the so-called “copyleft” principle. Copyleft FOSS licenses, in return
for the use rights that are granted, require anyone who redistributes
the copylefted software or any derivative works of it to third parties,
to do so under the same license conditions[^1056]. Thus, usually it
would not be legally possible to incorporate and redistribute copyright
protected parts of copylefted software in a proprietary licensed work.

It has been argued that this copyleft principle can restrict the
commercial use possibilities of the software[^1057]. Warnings have also
been issued regarding the dangers that companies may run if a negligent
or vindictive employee were to incorporate a piece of copyleft code in a
proprietary software program. In theory this could mean that the company
would be obliged to make its proprietary software available under a
copyleft FOSS license or remove it from the market. Although caution is
necessary, one can ask whether these “worst-case scenarios” are
realistic under Spanish law. The sanction for incorporating copyleft
code in proprietary software and distributing this under a closed or
proprietary license will usually be restricted to (a) a prohibition to
distribute the software whose license has been breached or (b) the
obligation to remove this piece of code from the program. In addition,
if the unlawful use has caused damage to the author, this damage will
need to be reimbursed, but not more than the damage actually suffered
(e.g. indemnities to the original copyright holder)[^1058]. But in all
events it is unlikely the owner of the proprietary software would be
obliged to release all its code under the copyleft FOSS license.

#### Validity of copyleft obligations {#_validity_of_copyleft_obligations}

The question relating to the validity of the copyleft clause coincides
with the question whether a rightsholder is able to validly establish
the conditions under which derivative or composite works must be
distributed. The answer to this question is affirmative: while the
righsholder of the original work does not hold any copyright in the
derivative work, he or she is entitled to determine the conditions for
the creation and redistribution of a derivative work of his/her original
work[^1059]. A derivative work can therefore only be exploited subject
to the consent of the copyright owner of the original work[^1060].

As copyright holder, an author is thus able to authorise the use of
his/her work for a particular use, and link certain conditions to this.
This right to determine the destined use or conditions of use of a work
is clearly stated in the Copyright Act, in Article 43[^1061]. The
rightsholder can therefore impose the copyleft condition based on these
rights.

All rights are subject to control against abuse, including copyright:
contractual conditions must comply with mandatorily applicable laws
(such as consumer protection, data privacy, etc.) morality and public
order. An author cannot therefore randomly exercise his/her economic and
moral rights. However, exercising his/her copyrights (by determining the
conditions of exploitation) cannot be considered as an abuse of rights
“as such”: only in exceptional cases will an author who invokes his/her
copyrights be guilty of an abuse of rights[^1062]. We consider that
licensing a work under a copyleft restriction will in principle not
constitute an abuse of right, because the author, in general, will be
able to prove a legitimate moral or tangible interest (and indeed a
public interest to maintain the code in the “commons”). A legitimate
moral interest could be that of wanting to keep the work within the FOSS
community, including in modified form.

It is argued that the copyleft provisions may only affect works to which
the rightsholder is granted rights to control: the original work,
derivative works, and composite works incorporating the original work.
Copyright rights are not granted with respect of independent works not
included in this list, and it may be considered an abuse of (copyright)
rights trying to extend those conditions or provisions beyond that which
the Copyright Law has permitted the author to control. Including for
example, works in the public domain, works not protected by copyright,
and independent works e.g. stored on the same carrier as the licensed
work[^1063].

However there is also an argument that, the license being considered a
contract, the licensee may be bound by whatever (legally valid)
conditions are imposed in the license, even outside the scope of
copyright law and including as to “non-derivative/composite/collective”
works. This is subject to limitations, of course. Competition law, for
example, would prohibit certain forms of product bundling or
restrictions on legitimate uses[^1064], and consumer protection law
would prohibit restrictions imposing conditions on certain forms of
claims for redress or indemnities.

In addition, it has been argued that copyleft restrictions may run
contrary to the exhaustion principle (with regard to the distribution
right). However, the Copyright Act specifies: “The first sale in the
European Union of a copy of a program by the copyright owner or with his
consent results in the exhaustion of the right to control the
distribution of that copy in the European Union, with the exception of
the right to control the further leasing and lending out of the program
or a copy thereof.”[^1065] Note that his “exhaustion” only applies to
controlling the tangible copy which has been lawfully released in the
European market. This does not affect the right of the author to lay
down certain conditions regarding the use of the (intangible) work on
that copy. The conditions of use established in the license on this work
“run” with the tangible copy, as the sole authorisation to exploit the
intangible work on that copy.

FOSS cases in Spain {#sec_spain_FOSSCasesinSpain}
-------------------

While there have been several cases regarding the use of free content
(specifically within the context of paying collecting societies' levies,
or not, and the burden of proof[^1066]), there have been no cases
regarding free and/or open source software. The judicial consideration
of “copyleft” as a concept within the aforementioned free content cases
is interesting, showing an increasing awareness of judges with respect
to FOSS licensing models.

Legal procedures {#sec_spain_legalprocedures}
----------------

### Legal action {#sec_spain_LegalAction}

With regard to the enforcement of copyrights in Spain, Articles 138-140
of the Copyright Act provide for a broad range of actions, in line with
the EC IPR Enforement Directive 2004/48/EC. These actions include:

a\) Preliminary measures including (i) seizure of both infringing
software/goods and devices, (ii) embargo of bank accounts where profits
may have been deposited, and (iii) suspension of non-authorised
activities

b\) Injunctions to (i) cease and desist from the illicit activity, (ii)
remove from the market any infringing articles, (iii) destroy any illict
software and devices, and (iv) suspend ISP services used infringing IPR
rights.

c\) Damages and interest (see below)

Legitimation for taking action is vested in the copyright holder or an
exclusive licensee of the infringed copyright (i.e. either or both may
take action). Non-exclusive licensees may not, however a third party
(e.g. a fiduciary) may be authorised by a copyright holder to take
action on his/her behalf. Only authors may claim for breach of moral
rights.

Proceedings are taken before the Civil Courts, in accordance with the
standard procedures of the Civil Procedure[^1067]. While the principles
of international private law applicable to software (applicable in Spain
as in any other EU jurisdiction) may complicate the question as to where
a case may be brought, Spanish courts follow EU Regulations in the
matter (Brussels and Rome I and II Regulations[^1068]). Depending on the
cause of action taken (IPR breach, contractual breach) and the nature
and domiciles of the parties, the courts and applicable law may vary.

Criminal law also sanctions copyright breaches for commercial (profit)
purposes[^1069], providing jail sentences up to two years and/or
equivalent fines (12-24 months) for those who, for profit and in
prejudice to a third party, reproduce, distribute or publically
communicate a work or its derivative, in any media, without the
corresponding authorisation from the rightsholder. The same sanction is
given to those who would import, export or stock copies of works without
authorisation, and those who manufacture, import or deal in any device
specifically aimed to supress or neutralise technological protection
measures applied to protect software or other protected works.

### Damages {#sec_spain_Damages}

Damage caused by copyright violations are compensated under Spanish law
in accordance with the Articles 138 and 140 Copyright Act, and generally
applicable principles of law relating to unlawful acts (extracontractual
infringements) and breaches of contract[^1070]. According to the
specific provisions of Article 140 of the Copyright Act, an injured
party of a copyright breach may request compensation for the loss
actually suffered and profits that were not gained. This can be
calculated as either a) the negative economic consequences (including
loss of profit / profits made by the infringer) or b) the amount the
licensor would have received had the infringer asked for consent to use
the protected work in the infringing manner[^1071]. Dual damages, triple
damages or other forms of punitive or special damages are not awarded
under Spanish law. Costs spent on tracing and prosecuting infringements
may also be compensated[^1072] and authors, when involved may also claim
for breach of moral rights, giving rise to further damages.

Infringements of software copyrights follow the same regime as
infringements of every other copyright[^1073]. The aforementioned
principle is therefore applicable in the case of copyright infringements
of software. Infringements of copyright protected software distributed
under a FOSS license would be sanctioned in the same manner (including
provisional and precautionary measures such as seizure of infringing
works, interlocutory injunctions, etc.). In no way whatsoever has the
author given up his/her rights.

It is yet to be seen whether the argument that, having given up rights
to royalties in the FOSS license, the licensor’s right to damages would
be limited, is correct. We would differ. Besides establishing his/her
reputation and recognition, an author can have other reasons to make a
work “freely” available[^1074]. The author may also have a direct
monetary advantage from the free distribution of his work. The simplest
way is circulating the free works with advertising. Another way is
providing specific services relating to the work. The free circulation
of the work ensures the work has many users. The author generates
his/her income from the provision of support and consulting services,
licensing “proprietary” add-ons[^1075], or so-called “dual licensing”
the code. This model uses --- as the name indicates — two different
licenses for distribution of the software. The first license is often a
FOSS copyleft license and ensures the work is circulated quickly and has
a wide range of users. A second license (without the copyleft
obligations) can then be obtained against payment by interested parties
who want to use the work without their own additions or modifications
being affected by copyleft[^1076].

### Recommended literature {#_recommended_literature_6}

#### General literature on copyright law {#_general_literature_on_copyright_law}

-   Rodrigo Bercovitz Rodríguez-Cano (Ed): “Comentarios a la Ley de
    Propiedad Intelectual”, (3rd Edition, 2007), Tecnos, Madrid.

-   Rodrigo Bercovitz Rodríguez-Cano et al., “Manual de Propiedad
    Intelectual”, Tirant lo Blanch, Valencia.

-   José Manuel Rodríguez Tapia et al., “Comentarios a la Ley de
    Propiedad Intelectual”, Aranzadi, Navarra 2007.

-   Alejandra Castro Bonilla, AUTORÍA Y TITULARIDAD EN EL DERECHO DE
    AUTOR, <http://www.informatica-juridica.com>, last
    visited 10.08.2010.

Switzerland {#chap.switzerland}
===========

author:\[Jaccard,Michel\] author:\[Ancelle,Juliette\]

Introduction to software protection under Swiss Law {#_introduction_to_software_protection_under_swiss_law}
---------------------------------------------------

### Applicable Law {#_applicable_law}

Under Swiss law, the protection of software is principally regulated by
the Federal Copyright Act of October 9, 1992[^1077], last revised on
July 1st, 2008 (“SCA”).

### Object of Protection {#_object_of_protection_3}

#### Definition of software {#_definition_of_software}

Pursuant to Section 2, paragraph 3 SCA, computer programs are considered
to be works under Swiss law, and as such, can be protected by
copyright[^1078]. Computer programs are purposely protected in a
separate category of works from literary works[^1079]. The notion of
computer programs as used in the Copyright Act includes any completed
process written in a programming language with the purpose of performing
a designated task[^1080]. The protection of computer programs comprises
the protection of the source code and of the object code of the computer
program, but it does not cover the ideas or principles on which the
software is based (algorithm, formula, etc.)[^1081]. It is also
generally understood that the copyright protection of computer programs
does not extend to the development nor the user’s documentation, which
can however be copyrighted separately to the extent that it meets the
requirement of protection for literary works as stated in Section 2
paragraph 1 SCA[^1082].

For the purpose of this Swiss chapter, the terms of “software” or
“computer software” will be deemed equivalent to “computer program”, as
defined above. We are aware of the distinction drawn between a software
and a computer program in relation with Open Source and within numerous
Open Source licenses[^1083]. A debate exists among Swiss scholars
regarding this differentiation, the main issue being related to the
inclusion of the documentation in the notion of software and therefore
in the definition of protected work, with the consequence that the
documentation should be covered by the exclusive rental right (see I.4
(b) below). The terms of “software” and “computer program” are however
being used interchangeably in the French version of the Copyright Act as
well as in the Message of the Federal Council which preceded the
adoption of the revised Act, and we will therefore consider both terms
to fall under the same definition in relation to Swiss copyright law.

#### Protected software {#_protected_software}

In order to be protected under Swiss copyright law, computer software
needs to meet the requirement of individual character, which is the
basic requirement for each protected work[^1084]. Such individual
character should only be found in the structure of the program, and not
in the ideas or the software’s algorithms or logic, which are not
protected by copyright. This requirement for computer programs must
however be understood as a requirement of novelty or an absence of
triviality[^1085]. Thus, computer software will be deemed to possess
sufficient individual character if experts find it original and
different from other existing software by the comparison of their source
and object codes[^1086] and to the extent that the author had sufficient
leeway at his/her disposal in the writing of the codes[^1087].

#### Unprotected and public domain software {#_unprotected_and_public_domain_software}

As a consequence of the requirements set forth in Section 2 of the
Copyright Act, Swiss law shall not protect software that does not
possess an individual character. Thus, a computer program that
professionals will find trivial in relation to preexisting ones, when
comparing their codes, and for which the author has not showed any
creativity in the writing of the code, shall not be considered as a
protected work under copyright law, and can therefore be freely used, to
the extent that it is not limited by existing covenants governing it or
by the general rules of unfair competition[^1088]. Furthermore, the
protection of software developed by a computer is discussed under Swiss
law, as some specialized authors consider that the human intervention is
too remote to trigger the legal protection of the work[^1089].

Under Swiss law, two categories of software will be considered as public
domain: (i) software for which the protection has expired through lapse
of time (50 years after the death of the author; see I.6 below for more
details), and (ii) software for which the author has voluntarily given
up his/her rights and which he/she has offered for the use of the
public. This type of public domain software is characterized by the
absence of exclusive enforceable rights on the software and the free
availability of the computer program, but not necessarily of the source
code. Due to the absence of a registration requirement for copyrighted
works in Swiss copyright law however, the author of the software who
wishes to make it a public domain software must express it clearly, for
instance through a notice attached to each copy of the software[^1090].
The public domain software must be distinguished from the Free and Open
Source Software (FOSS)[^1091]: in the case of FOSS, the author or
co-authors license their rights to the users by giving access to the
source code but remain the valid holders of the copyright on the
software, whereas public domain software can be validly used, modified,
or published without the need for the issuance of a license.

### Owner of rights {#_owner_of_rights}

#### Author as a natural person {#_author_as_a_natural_person}

Pursuant to Section 6 SCA, an author is the natural person who created
the protected work[^1092]. Thus, in the case of computer software, the
programmer who created the software will be considered to be its author
in the sense of copyright law, and therefore will own the copyright to
the protected work[^1093]. As a result and contrary to what is the case
in the USA for example[^1094], a corporate entity or a legal person
cannot be the “original” author of a computer program, even when it has
for instance financed the development of the program. In such a case
however, the corporate entity may benefit from the mechanism of legal
assignment of certain exclusive rights in favor of the employer
regarding software created by an employee (see section I.3 below).

#### Joint work : coauthors {#_joint_work_coauthors}

In the development of a computer program, there is often more than one
person involved, and therefore more than one author in the sense of
copyright law. Most of the time, the developed software will be
considered as a joint work, created by several coauthors. Pursuant to
Section 7 SCA, a coauthor is a natural person who contributed to the
creation of a work by bringing in his/her creative input[^1095]. The two
main criteria are thus (i) the objective creative collaboration but also
(ii) the intent of the authors to create a work together. The coauthor
of a protected work must be distinguished from an auxiliary, who simply
performs a task he/she has been entrusted with, with no provision for
any creative input, and who therefore does not own any rights to the
protected work[^1096]. In addition, the determining factor that will
allow a work to be deemed a joint work and not a derivative work is the
accepted and voluntary joint creative collaboration on a common and
unique creation within an agreed period of time.

In the case of a joint work, the coauthors are the joint holders of the
copyright, with the consequence that they can only use the joint work in
common or with each coauthor’s agreement and that one coauthor cannot
dispose of his/her share without the consent of the others[^1097]. The
coauthors have however a duty to make the use of the work possible and
they cannot withhold their authorization of use without cause[^1098].
Each coauthor has the standing to represent the joint tenancy of
coauthors in case of infringement, but this does not affect the joint
ownership of the copyright by all coauthors[^1099].

The legal regime of the Copyright Act applicable to coauthors has been
construed by the Swiss Supreme Court as establishing a “sui generis
joint ownership”, with the consequence that it does not correspond to
any regime of co-ownership already existing under Swiss law[^1100].
Aside from the mandatory rules on co-authorship and in particular on the
joint ownership of the joint work set out in Section 7 SCA, the
coauthors may choose to regulate their relationship via an express
agreement, regulating for instance the decision making process or the
liability of the coauthors. In the absence of a specific agreement, the
coauthors shall form an *unregistered partnership*, regulated by
Sections 530 to 551 of the Swiss Code of Obligations (SCO)[^1101], the
main consequence being that all decisions are to be made unanimously
(Section 534 SCO).

#### Copyright assignment {#_copyright_assignment_5}

Another specificity of computer programs in comparison to other
protected works relates to the context of their creation. Most of the
time, software is developed within a company by programmers who are
employees and have in fact been hired for the purpose of developing
software. Thus, taking into consideration the tension between the
general principle of designating a natural person only as an author and
the economic need of companies investing in the software development,
the Swiss legislator has established an automatic legal assignment of
rights — absent an agreement to the contrary between the
parties — according to which only the employer is entitled to benefit
from the rights of use on a software created by the employee as part of
his/her work obligations[^1102]. The two criteria for the application of
this provision are therefore that the programmer developed the software
(i) when he/she was *at the employer’s* service and (ii) while
*performing his/her employment obligations*. This rule thus only applies
when an employment relationship in the sense of Swiss labor law exists,
and, as already mentioned, can be modified by an agreement between the
parties[^1103].

Where no employment relationship exists and the software is developed by
a self-employed programmer upon a client’s request, the determination of
the original ownership of the rights will depend on the interpretation
of the intent of the parties. Under Swiss law, to determine whether the
copyright on the created work has been assigned or whether the author
has only granted a license, one must interpret the intent of the parties
according to the theory of purpose[^1104], although in case of doubt on
the purpose, a court will favor the granting of a license instead of a
full assignment of copyright. Swiss copyright law indeed does not
incorporate the concept of “work for hire” as it exists in the
USA[^1105], and the ownership over the rights will therefore be
determined on a case-by-case basis, interpreting the intent of the
parties. In the case where it is established that only a license has
been granted, the most problematic question remains the question of
exclusivity, and whether the parties intended any license of rights to
be exclusive. It is generally admitted that exclusivity has been granted
in cases where the software incorporates trade secrets, when its
development has only been possible thanks to the client’s knowledge or
when the source code has been handed over[^1106].

*Best practices* : In light of the above, we would recommend to always
specify in writing in case of outsourced development work : (1) who will
be the author of the created software, (2) whether a license will be
granted for the created software, and (3) in such a case, whether the
license will be exclusive or not.

### Scope of protection {#_scope_of_protection}

#### Exclusive rights {#_exclusive_rights_3}

As is the case for any protected work, the author of computer software
benefits from exclusive rights over his/her work. Thus, as provided for
in Section 10 SCA, the author of computer software has the exclusive
right to decide how, when and whether his/her work shall be used[^1107].
Section 10 SCA contains an illustrative list of what is covered by this
exclusive right of use of the work[^1108]. These exclusive rights are
the patrimonial rights of the author, as opposed to his/her moral
rights, and can be freely assigned or granted to others by the author,
usually in exchange for financial compensation. The patrimonial
exclusive rights are, however, not limited to lucrative use and also
cover not-for-profit use of the work[^1109]. As regards computer
programs, the most relevant right is the right to make copies and to
distribute them, which includes online distribution according to the
prevailing opinion among Swiss authors[^1110].

#### Specific rights for computer software under Swiss law {#_specific_rights_for_computer_software_under_swiss_law}

In addition to the general patrimonial exclusive rights to which every
author is entitled under the Swiss Copyright Act, authors of computer
software benefit from two additional exclusive rights: (i) an exclusive
rental right[^1111] and (ii) a utilization right[^1112].

Under Swiss law, the right of distribution does not include the
exclusive right to rent out the protected work. Thus, only authors of
computer software may own an exclusive rental right on their created
work[^1113]. This provision means that the sale of a copy of the
software does not deprive its author of the right to rent it out, i.e.
to allow a third party to use it in exchange for financial compensation.
Consequently, and contrary to what is the case for other works protected
by copyright[^1114], the user who acquired the software is not entitled
to rent it out without infringing upon the author’s exclusive right,
unless an express license has been granted[^1115].

The second exclusive right specific to computer software is a
utilization right. Pursuant to Section 12, paragraph 2 SCA, computer
software that has been lawfully sold *can be used or sold again*. Swiss
copyright law therefore expressly protects the right of the lawful owner
of the protected software to use it[^1116]. This use is however limited
by the definition of what a lawful utilization of the software is:
pursuant to Section 17 of the Ordinance on Copyright and Neighboring
Rights[^1117], lawful utilization of computer software is utilization by
the legitimate buyer in compliance with the contractual conditions of
the sale. This specific right of utilization for computer software
compensates for the fact that the private use exception for copyrighted
work does not apply to software[^1118].

#### Moral Rights {#_moral_rights_8}

The author of a computer program, like any author in the sense of the
Swiss Copyright Act, owns moral rights to his/her creation. This notion
covers two main exclusive rights: (i) the right to be credited as the
author of the work[^1119] and (ii) the right to the respect of the
integrity of the work[^1120]. The moral rights are strictly attached to
the personality of the author or of his/her heirs and therefore cannot
be alienated nor transferred to a third party by any means[^1121]. The
transfer of the patrimonial rights does not entail the transfer of the
moral rights.

Thus, regarding the right to paternity of the work, the author of the
work will always be entitled to be credited as the author but will also
have the right to choose to remain anonymous. The author can however
waive this right, which is often the case for employees, renouncing in
their employment contract to exercise their right to be credited for
their creation, although they remain the sole author(s) of the
work[^1122].

As regards the right to the integrity of the work, the author can always
authorize third parties to modify his/her work by contract but pursuant
to Section 11, paragraph 2 SCA, the author retains the right to oppose
any modification that would harm his/her personality. This right can be
waived by the author, but will in any case have very limited impact in
relation to computer software, since any modification of the code or of
the programming language will hardly be found to be harmful to the
author’s personality[^1123].

### Exceptions to the exclusive rights {#_exceptions_to_the_exclusive_rights_2}

Two provisions of the Copyright Act are to be mentioned as exceptions to
the exclusive rights.

Firstly, Section 21 SCA authorizes the lawful owner of the software to
obtain information on the software’s interfaces through the reverse
engineering of the program’s code. The reverse engineering, which can be
operated by the owner of the software or by an authorized third party,
is however limited by law to the case of obtaining necessary information
for the development or use of interoperable software and this
information cannot be disclosed to unauthorized third parties[^1124].
Thus, the reverse engineering of software is only valid under Swiss law
when the two following conditions are met: (i) the information on the
interface must be necessary for the development of interoperability, and
(ii) the reverse engineering must be operated by an authorized person,
i.e. the lawful owner of the software or a third party mandated by
him/her.

The second relevant exception to the exclusive rights of the author
resides in the right of the person authorized to use the software to
make a backup copy[^1125]. This right cannot be limited by contract, but
is limited to *one copy only*, and only belongs to the lawful user of
the software as described above[^1126]. Any copy made for any other
purpose, even by the lawful user, will be deemed an infringement on the
author’s exclusive right. The rightful user is also authorized to make
temporary copies, insofar as they are technically necessary for the
transmission of the work to a third party or for any other lawful
utilization of the work, and that they do not have any independent
economic significance[^1127].

### Term of protection {#_term_of_protection_5}

Under Swiss law, the general term for protection of copyright for
computer software is fifty (50) years after the death of the
author[^1128]. This differs from the longer term of protection for other
copyrighted works that lasts for seventy (70) years after the death of
the author.

In the case of co-authorship, the protection of the software ends fifty
(50) years after the death of the last living coauthor[^1129]. If each
coauthor’s input, however, can be separated from the rest of the work,
the protection for each separate input will end fifty (50) years after
the death of its author[^1130].

As regards to derivative work, the term of protection will differ for
the original work and for the additional creation, each part being
protected by copyright for fifty (50) years after the death of its
respective author[^1131].

### Special measures {#_special_measures_5}

As a signatory of the WIPO Copyright Treaty (WCT)[^1132] and the WIPO
Performances and Phonograms Treaty (WPPT)[^1133], Switzerland has
adopted a provision in the Copyright Act for the protection of effective
technological measures[^1134]. Pursuant to Section 39a SCA, the removal
or circumvention of effective technological measures used for the
protection of copyrighted works or other protected objects is
prohibited. Swiss law however provides for an exception to this rule:
circumventing protective technological measures will not be punished by
law if it is performed for the sole purpose of allowing an authorized
use of the protected work[^1135].

The Swiss Copyright Act makes it a criminal offence to violate the
provision on the protection of technological measures by circumventing
or removing the said effective measures for the purpose of unlawfully
using the protected work, but also by selling or offering products
allowing such actions (Section 69a SCA). The infringer, who must have
acted intentionally to be held criminally liable, will be punished by a
fine, or by imprisonment in the case that he/she is a professional
infringer. In addition, it must be noted that once an infringement to
the rules concerning the protection of technological measures occurs, a
presumption exists that it has created a threat to copyright and the
author will therefore be entitled to damages without being required to
establish any actual infringement to copyright[^1136].

Analysis of FOSS under Swiss law {#_analysis_of_foss_under_swiss_law}
--------------------------------

For the purpose of this chapter, the terms below will have the following
meanings:

*Free and Open Source Software (FOSS)*

:   software subject to an Open Source[^1137] license granting the right
    to use, analyze, modify and improve the said software by making its
    source code freely available to users.

*Proprietary software*

:   computer software that is the exclusive property of its
    developers/publishers and which can only be copied or used in
    compliance with the owner’s licensing agreements, their source code
    being rarely made available.

### Common legal issues in relation with FOSS {#_common_legal_issues_in_relation_with_foss}

We shall analyze in this section the legal issues regularly discussed in
relation to Open Source Software, starting with the question of
copyright protection of FOSS and then addressing the questions of
enforcement of FOSS licenses and of the consequences of a breach of such
licenses under applicable Swiss law.

### FOSS under Swiss copyright law {#_foss_under_swiss_copyright_law}

#### Characterization of FOSS {#_characterization_of_foss}

One major issue in relation with copyright law that takes on an
important dimension with respect to Open Source Software is the question
of characterization. Indeed, one of the legal difficulties in FOSS
consists of determining who is entitled to issue a license or to bring a
lawsuit in case of infringement, or in determining the duration of the
protection of the software. These issues can be solved by the
characterization of the Open Source Software either as a *joint work* or
as a *derivative work* as defined in the Copyright Act.

FOSS shall be considered a joint work under Swiss law when two or more
persons have worked in common on the development of original and unique
software for a determined period of time[^1138]. Thus, when several
developers have worked together for the purpose of creating original
software, the result will usually be considered a joint work in the
sense of copyright law, each developer being a coauthor.

The question becomes more complicated when unfinished software is
created and then made available under an Open Source license for the
purpose of being further developed by its users. In such cases, it will
be hard to establish that the original developer and the user worked in
collaboration with a common purpose, i.e. the creation of original
software. Thus, a common creation will rarely be found, and the software
which has been modified or improved by the user will most of the time be
considered a derivative work in the sense of Section 3 SCA. The
creator(s) of this new version of the software will therefore be a new
author (or new authors) of a new work, this characterization giving rise
to different rights.

#### Rights and obligations of the original coauthors {#_rights_and_obligations_of_the_original_coauthors}

The coauthors of a protected work are the joint holders of the copyright
pursuant to Section 7 SCA and as such form a sui generis legal tenancy.
The co-authorship and its legal consequences will have an impact on two
main questions in relation with Open Source: (i) who is entitled to give
a license and (ii) who has the power to act in case of infringement?

As regards to the first issue, the legal regime that applies to
coauthors, which is a regime of joint tenancy imposed by law but not
defined by the legislator, implies that no assignment can be awarded nor
license granted on the software without the common consent of *all
coauthors*[^1139]. This system can be highly burdensome, especially in
relation with Open Source, where the main purpose is to make software
freely available to everyone and to allow users to benefit from further
developments. Although the strictness of this rule is partially lessened
by the obligation for all coauthors not to withhold their consent
without motive[^1140], the regime of joint ownership can be extremely
limiting, especially in the context of Open Source where it is essential
to identify the person entitled to grant the Open Source license, and
where the requirement of obtaining all the coauthors' consents would be
considered a hurdle to free distribution. The coauthors can, however,
derogate to the legal regime with a convention entitling one or several
of the coauthors to represent them all for the exercise of rights of
use.

*Best practices* : In order to escape from the burdensome legal regime
of co-authorship, we would advise authors of Open Source software to
join the Free Software Foundation (FSF) which provides a system of
assignment of the author’s copyright to the FSF, which will then be in
charge of the management of the rights[^1141].

Regarding the second issue relating to the ability to bring a claim in
case of infringement, Swiss law authorizes any coauthor to act but it
will always be on behalf of all the coauthors[^1142]. This system
facilitates the protection of the software by allowing any coauthor to
act independently on his/her own and by automatically ensuring that all
coauthors will benefit from the claim in case of a positive result. The
legal regime however does not create a similar system of solidarity in
case of a claim for infringement by a third party against the coauthors:
under Swiss law, a claim can only be brought against one coauthor and
still be valid, but the coauthor shall only be liable for his/her share
of the work — the work being divided in equal shares by the number of
coauthors without regard to the actual input of each co-author. Such a
system allows a third party to enforce its rights without having to
identify all coauthors, but it also protects each coauthor from full
liability.

#### Authors of a derivative work {#_authors_of_a_derivative_work}

The characterization of portions of Open Source software as a derivative
work will also have an impact on the rights of the author, the main
legal issue relating to his/her ability to further distribute FOSS. In
the majority of cases, the user who further develops Open Source
software, either by modifying or improving it, will be considered the
author of a derivative work and as such own a copyright on what has been
modified — inasmuch as this improvement or modification can be protected
by copyright, i.e. is original, which will usually be the case[^1143].
But if the author wants to distribute the modified software to other
users, it is necessary to have the consent of the original author (or
coauthors) since the original work is incorporated in the derivative
one. For most FOSS licenses, the original author already consents to a
further distribution of FOSS by its users, and therefore the consent of
the original author will not be an issue (See GPL, Mozilla, etc.).
However, it may be the case that the Open Source software has been
freely distributed under a certain license that does not allow any
further distribution by the end user or any distribution of the modified
software[^1144], in which case the author of the new derivative work
will need to obtain the consent of the original developer(s) to license
his/her modified software under a new FOSS license.

#### Assignement of copyright {#_assignement_of_copyright}

As we have seen in section I.3 above, the SCA provides for a special
rule regarding computer programs that are created by an employee as part
of his/her employment obligations. In such cases, although the
programmer remains the author of the protected program, the employer
will automatically own all of the exclusive rights of use on such
programs. Thus, the employer will be the entity with the authority to
validly license the software under an Open Source license, with no need
to obtain the employee’s consent[^1145]. The benefit of this rule can be
that several developers may create a company together, for which they
work and which would automatically hold the right to license the created
software, without requiring the conclusion of a convention for the
management of the rights of all coauthors for each newly created piece
of software, in this way escaping from the burdensome system of
co-authorship.

### Moral copyrights {#_moral_copyrights_3}

FOSS being protected by copyright, the developer is thus an author as we
have clearly established, and as such, he/she still owns a moral
copyright on the licensed software. Therefore, the modifications or
improvements of the software, although authorized by the license, cannot
infringe upon his/her moral copyright, and more specifically cannot harm
the author’s personality[^1146]. The question of whether a modification
of the software will infringe upon the author’s personality rights will
be established on a case by case basis, and it will very rarely be found
under Swiss law in the context of computer programs[^1147]. This is even
truer in the case of FOSS, where the source code has been disclosed, and
therefore the programming language made available to all users for the
purpose of being modified. In such a context, it will be extremely
difficult to establish any harm to the developer’s personality, the only
case being when his/her reputation as a programmer would be damaged by
the subsequent modifications. Such harm will however be highly difficult
to establish in the case of FOSS, and more particularly if the software
is made available under a GPL, since this license creates an obligation
for subsequent users/modifiers to give explicit notice of their
modifications[^1148], with the consequence that the changes will not be
attributed to the original author and therefore not harm his/her
reputation. It is however important to bear in mind that the broad right
to modify the original software granted by a FOSS general license can
still be limited by the original author’s enforcement of his/her moral
right[^1149].

### Enforcement of FOSS licences {#_enforcement_of_foss_licences}

#### General contract law issues {#_general_contract_law_issues}

Based on the above definition, the specificity of FOSS is that the
source code of a computer program is made freely available to users
through the delivery of a FOSS license. Yet, in order to enforce such a
license, the latter needs to have been validly concluded between the
concerned parties and its content needs to comply with the local
applicable law — which also raises questions as regards to the law
applicable to the contract and more general issues of conflict of laws
(see IV.1 below).

Assuming that the FOSS license is subject to Swiss law, the main
contract law issues in relation with FOSS would therefore relate to the
valid conclusion of the said license, the identification of the parties
to that license, as well as the validity of its content.

As a preliminary remark, it should be noted that Swiss authors generally
agree that a FOSS license should be analyzed in the context of contract
law and should not be considered to be a unilateral legal act[^1150].
Under Swiss law, a contract is defined as a bilateral or multilateral
legal act by which the parties exchange the expression of their matching
intents (meeting of the minds)[^1151]. Pursuant to that definition, a
first issue to consider is how the FOSS license is validly concluded,
i.e. how does the meeting of the minds occur?

*Conclusion of a binding contract*

Under Swiss law, it is generally admitted that a contract can be validly
concluded on the Internet, simply by clicking on a “Download” or “I
agree” button[^1152]. Therefore, a FOSS license can be validly concluded
between the author and the user when he/she downloads the Open Source
software after reading the license to which the use of the software is
subject and clicking on the “I agree” button. The FOSS license is thus
concluded between the right holder and the user by the delivery of the
software to the user or his/her access to it. The question of the
conclusion of the license is however more complicated when the software
is transferred without the user having knowledge of the FOSS license
governing it. It is indeed common that a user acquires Open Source
software without coming across the FOSS license under which the rights
are granted[^1153].

In such a case, Swiss scholars consider that the original author of FOSS
and the end user are not bound by a license or any other
agreement[^1154]. The consequence of such a situation is that the user
will not benefit from the rights of the FOSS license as long as he/she
is not aware of its existence: in other words, the user will not be
entitled to modify or improve the software until he/she is bound by the
conditions of the FOSS license, with the risk arising that any
unauthorized modification of the source code will be considered to
constitute copyright infringement. Thus, should no copy of the FOSS
license be communicated to the user together with the software, then no
valid license can be concluded and therefore no modification of the
software will be considered valid and covered by the FOSS license. The
content of the FOSS license will be considered as the expression of an
offer by the licensor (i.e. the author of the software or the holder of
the copyright) to conclude an agreement governing the use of the
software. Indeed, under Swiss law, an offer in the sense of contract law
does not need to be addressed to a specific person and it can be
expressly or tacitly accepted by any recipient[^1155]. Thus, the user
who complies with the provisions and conditions contained in the FOSS
license will be considered as having validly accepted the offer and the
license will be validly concluded and binding upon the parties[^1156].
This raises however the question of the duration of the validity of the
offer and the possibility for the licensor to withdraw such an offer.
According to Swiss scholars, the offer will remain binding upon the
licensor as long as the user has in good faith the possibility of
validly concluding the contract by the simple exercise of the conditions
of use, and it will therefore be extremely difficult for the licensor to
withdraw his/her offer and avoid the conclusion of a license agreement
on the Open Source Software[^1157].

If no license agreement has been concluded between the user and the
licensor, the modification of the software by the user could constitute
a copyright infringement, which may trigger civil as well as criminal
liability. The user’s liability, however, will most probably be reduced
or at least strongly limited in such circumstances, a Court being likely
to take into consideration the concomitant liability of the author who
did not properly attach the Open Source license to the distributed
software, therefore giving rise to legal uncertainty.

*Best Practices* : It is always recommended to accompany the software
with the FOSS general license under which it is offered to be granted,
including licenses that do not require so, in order to avoid unclear
situations where it is unsure whether a binding contract exists between
the parties, because it will otherwise depend on the interpretation of
the user’s actions to determine whether he/she intended to be bound or
not.

*Determination of the parties to the FOSS license*

Along with the question of whether a valid FOSS license has been
concluded with the transfer of the software, the other issue to be
considered in relation to Open Source is to determine who is a party to
that license agreement.

The situation is particularly complicated when the user himself/herself
starts licensing the modified software and so on. As already mentioned,
a FOSS license is always concluded between the *author* of the Open
Source software, who is the licensor, and the *user* of the software who
is the licensee. When there are several authors of the work however
(either coauthors or several authors of a derivative work), the license
must be granted by all authors and the conditions of use of the FOSS
license towards all of them will be binding upon the user. This
situation is generally solved by the license itself which will contain a
clause according to which the user, by accepting the conditions of the
license, will automatically be bound to all previous authors of the
software[^1158]. This mechanism is authorized under Swiss law and
therefore creates a valid contractual relationship between all parties.

*Violation of the FOSS license — Breach of contract or Copyright
infringement?*

The question of determining whether a violation of the FOSS license
constitutes a breach of contract or a copyright infringement may have a
certain impact in Switzerland as regards procedural issues as well as
potential remedies to which the authors may be entitled. The protection
for Open Source software can be based on both legal grounds, and the
claim will depend on the type of violation that has occurred.

Thus, the copyright holder will be entitled to invoke a copyright
infringement for the cases in which the user does not give proper credit
notice or modifies the software when he has only been given the right to
use it, whereas the claim of a user brought in order to obtain the
disclosure of the source code will only be based on contract law since
it only constitutes a breach of the license agreement and not a
copyright infringement. It is however conceivable that an action
consists of both a breach of contract and an infringement to copyright,
in which case the claimant will be able to invoke both violations and
the Court will usually have proper jurisdiction on both.

Some differences however exist between a claim based on copyright law
and a claim based on contract law, in particular from a procedural point
of view. The Swiss legal system being a federal system, a claim is
usually brought in front of a local cantonal court before ending up in
front of the Swiss Supreme Court; for copyright claims however, there is
only one unique competent jurisdiction at the cantonal level before an
appeal can be brought in front of the Swiss Supreme Court, whereas a
claim based on contract law may go through several cantonal appeals
before ending up in front of the Swiss Supreme Court[^1159].

In addition to this procedural difference, the remedies in contract law
and copyright law that would be applicable to a violation of a FOSS
license can differ in some respects, reason why the claimant will often
use both grounds in front of the court[^1160]. Indeed, although damages
can be asked both in case of copyright infringement and breach of
contract, contract law’s sole alternative remedy will be limited to
injunction for specific performance, whereas the SCA provides for more
specific remedies, such as the prohibition of further distribution of
the infringing copy and/or its destruction[^1161]. In case of copyright
infringement, the author will also be entitled to ask for a declarative
judgment of his/her quality of author[^1162], or to ask for an
injunction to prevent the infringement from happening or to make it stop
in cases where the infringement is still producing effects[^1163]. It
should also be noted that Swiss copyright law additionally makes it a
criminal offence to perform most acts of copyright infringement[^1164].

#### Warranty and Liability {#_warranty_and_liability}

As regards FOSS, there are two main aspects to be analyzed in this
section: one relates to the warranty granted or more generally excluded
by the licensor, and the second relates to the validity of a waiver of
the licensor’s liability.

*Exclusion of warranty*

Under Swiss law, the regime applicable to the exclusion of warranty will
depend on the characterization of the license that will determine the
applicable contract law rules. Swiss contract law sets out general rules
applicable to all types of contracts and specific rules regulating
specific types of contracts (“contrats nommés”)[^1165]. License
agreements are not specifically regulated under Swiss contract law but
are considered as “sui generis contracts”[^1166] and are therefore
subject to the general rules on contracts. In some instances however, a
court may apply some rules of specifically regulated agreements by
analogy to a license agreement when it is deemed appropriate[^1167], and
Swiss legal scholars have therefore identified specific rules that may
be applicable to FOSS licenses.

Although the Open Source Definition provides in the Section 1 that no
royalties or fees should be perceived by the licensor under a FOSS
license for the selling or giving away of the Open Source
software[^1168], the distribution of such software can be included in
the sale of an aggregate software which can be done against payment or a
fee may be charged for the physical act of the transfer. In such cases,
Swiss scholars have found that the rules of sales contract could be
applicable to the FOSS license, which would be subject to the
limitations of the exclusion of warranty[^1169]. Pursuant to Section 199
SCO, a clause excluding all warranties in a sales contract is void in
the case of fraud. Thus, a clause such as Section 15 of the GNU GPL v3
or Section 11 of the GNU GPL v2 excluding all kinds of warranty could be
found non-valid under Swiss law if the transfer of the Open Source
Software incorporates elements that can be assimilated to a sales
contract and would therefore not be enforceable in cases of fraud. The
invalidity of the clause excluding all warranties will however not
affect the validity and enforceability of the rest of the license
pursuant to the principle of severability.

On the other hand, should the Open Source software be transferred
entirely free of charge, such a transfer could fall under the rules of
donation, applicable by analogy as regards to the rules on the exclusion
of warranty[^1170]. Yet, in case of a donation, Section 248, paragraph 2
SCO makes the exclusion of all warranties valid. In that context, the
provisions from the GPL mentioned above, excluding all types of
warranties would be deemed valid under Swiss law[^1171].

*Waiver of liability*

In addition to the exclusion of warranties, most FOSS licenses contain a
provision waiving all liability of the author/licensor for damages (e.g.
article 16 GNU GPLv3 & article 11 GNU GPL v2). Some of these provisions
reserve however the mandatory provisions of the applicable law[^1172].
Assuming that Swiss law is applicable to a FOSS license, the waiver of
liability would not be valid in case of fraud or gross
negligence[^1173]. Any other exclusion of liability for damages
resulting from the use of the Open Source software, which is not covered
by the cases of gross negligence and fraud, shall therefore be
considered valid[^1174].

#### The copyleft principle {#_the_copyleft_principle_5}

A “copyleft” license is a license by which the licensor grants the right
to use, distribute and modify the computer program to a licensee, under
the condition that all further distributions of the modified software
make the work available in a form that facilitates further modification
and use the same license. Not all FOSS licenses are “copyleft” licenses
(for instance the BSD and the Apache licenses are not “copyleft”,
whereas the GPL and the LGPL are). In the absence of a “copyleft”
clause, a user that has modified the Open Source software is entitled to
integrate his/her new work in another program and sell it as proprietary
software, or simply to refuse access to the source code in further
distributions of the work[^1175].

One issue related to the “copyleft” principle is the question of the
compatibility of various FOSS licenses with each other. A license that
does not incorporate a “copyleft” clause can indeed be considered
incompatible with other FOSS licenses, which can lead to limitations for
the re-distribution of the software by the user[^1176]. The issue can
however be solved conventionally by a clause integrated in the Open
Source License that will determine which other Open Source licenses are
compatible and can therefore be used by the users to license their
modified version of the software[^1177].

This principle raises also other legal issues, in particular as regards
the integration of a part of Open Source software into proprietary
software : is the user under the obligation to make the full new
software available under a FOSS license or is it limited to the part of
the code developed under an Open Source license? Swiss scholars agree to
say that in such cases, the new software constitutes a derivative work
in the sense of copyright law, and therefore, the part of the code
originating from Open Source software remains subject to the conditions
of the Open Source license that has been granted by the original author.

#### Remedies — Calculation of damages in case of infringement {#_remedies_8201_8212_8201_calculation_of_damages_in_case_of_infringement}

One of the remedies in case of breach of the FOSS license being the
possibility to claim for damages, the delicate question consists in
determining the amount of these damages.

A claim for damages, in cases of copyright infringement as well as in
cases of breach of contract, is regulated by the general rules of the
Swiss Code of Obligations (SCO). Pursuant to Section 42 SCO, the
claimant has the burden to prove the existence of a damage. The amount
of the damages corresponds to the difference between the current capital
of the claimant and the capital he/she would own if the breach had not
occurred[^1178]. In case of infringement to intellectual property rights
however, it is not always easy for the claimant to compute the claimed
damages, and Swiss law does not require him/her to file a claim stating
a precise amount[^1179]. The claimant must however provide the Court
with sufficient elements to calculate the amount of damages to award,
based on the full instruction of the case and the review of the
evidence.

In cases of copyright infringement, the most common basis for a court in
computing damages is the amount of failed opportunities of the claimant
due to the copyright infringement[^1180]. It may, however, be extremely
difficult to establish that the infringement resulted in the loss of
opportunities for the copyright holder, and the amount of damages can
also be computed on the basis of the royalties that the right holder
would have received, should the protected work have been used under a
validly granted license[^1181]. In the absence of any case in relation
to Open Source software in Switzerland, it is difficult to determine in
advance which method a court would use to compute damages for the case
of a breach of a FOSS license. It would however most likely include the
judicial costs of the prevailing party, as it is common in Switzerland
for the losing party to bear the judicial costs of the adverse
party[^1182].

FOSS case law in Switzerland {#_foss_case_law_in_switzerland}
----------------------------

As of today, we are not aware of the reporting of any case law on FOSS
in Switzerland. A decision was rendered by the Swiss Federal
Administrative Tribunal on July 2, 2009, and later by the Swiss Federal
Tribunal on March 11, 2011[^1183] and involved, among others, Red Hat
Limited as a plaintiff in this case against the Federal Bureau for
Buildings and Logistic. This case however did not relate to any legal
issue in relation with Open Source Software but was in fact about Swiss
public procurement issues.

Legal procedures {#_legal_procedures_2}
----------------

We will start by analyzing briefly the applicable principles of conflict
of laws that would give jurisdiction to a Swiss court and lead to the
application of Swiss law. We will then provide the reader with a short
overview of possible judicial proceedings in Switzerland in case of
infringement or breach of the FOSS license.

### Application of Swiss law pursuant to private international law (PIL) {#_application_of_swiss_law_pursuant_to_private_international_law_pil}

In most cases, infringement and breach of a FOSS license will involve
foreign players located in different countries. It is therefore
important to determine (i) which court should have jurisdiction over
this case and (ii) which substantive law the court will have to apply to
the case.

Regarding the competent jurisdiction to hear the case, unless the
parties have incorporated a valid choice of court clause in the license
agreement, Section 109, paragraph 1 of the Swiss Private International
Law Act (PILA) provides that the competent court which should hear
intellectual property claims is the Swiss court at the defendant’s
domicile, or, in the absence of domicile, the court at the place where
the protection is sought. This provision designates the competent court
to hear cases of *infringement* of intellectual property right and sets
as a general rule that the Swiss courts of the domicile of the defendant
will have jurisdiction over all cases of infringement, whether there has
been an infringement on a Swiss or a foreign right[^1184]. This rule
differs in some respect with the conflict rule of the Lugano Convention
of September 16, 1988 that sets as the competent jurisdiction to hear
infringement cases, the courts of the defendant’s domicile or the court
of the place where the harmful event occurred[^1185].

In cases of a contractual breach only of the FOSS license, which does
not constitute a copyright infringement, Sections 112 and 113 PILA
provide that the court of the domicile or the habitual residence of the
defendant, or, if the defendant has no domicile or does not reside in
Switzerland, the court of the place of performance of the contract has
jurisdiction over the case.

As regards applicable law, the general principle of Swiss rules on
conflict of laws is the freedom of the parties to a binding contract to
agree upon a choice of law clause[^1186]. This general principle also
applies to contracts pertaining to intellectual property, in which a
choice of law clause is allowed[^1187], but in the absence of which the
law of the place where the grantor of the intellectual property right
has his/her habitual residence is applicable. In specific cases of
contracts pertaining to copyrights, in the absence of a choice of law
clause, the applicable law will be the law of the place where the person
having control over the server containing information has his/her
residence, and not of the place where the actual server is
located[^1188]. This rule however only applies to the contractual
obligations of the parties and a different conflict rule exists for the
questions of infringement of an intellectual property right. Pursuant to
Section 110 PILA, the law applicable to infringement cases is the law of
the State in respect of which intellectual property protection is
sought. The parties can however agree upon the application of the law of
the forum (lex fori) to damages claims *after* the harm has
occurred[^1189]. This ability for the parties to choose the lex fori is
however limited to the question of the computation of damages and does
not cover the preliminary question of infringement[^1190].

### Overview of the possible proceedings in Switzerland in case of infringement {#_overview_of_the_possible_proceedings_in_switzerland_in_case_of_infringement}

#### Civil proceedings {#_civil_proceedings}

On January 1st, 2011, a new unified civil procedure act came into force
in Switzerland, and all cantons are therefore subject to the same
procedural rules. The obligation for cantons to have a unique trial
court as regards to copyright claims remains in force and has be
confirmed by the new unified procedure[^1191]. This rule applies to
cases on issues of copyright infringement but also on issues of transfer
of rights or on licenses to use copyrighted work, and therefore covers
claims that could be filed in Switzerland in relation to a FOSS license.
Following a decision from the unique cantonal trial court, an appeal
will always be possible to the Swiss Supreme Court[^1192].

The filing of provisional measures in relation to copyright claims is
possible for the party that shows that a copyright infringement is
likely to have occurred or is likely to occur in the near future[^1193].
The provisional measures will usually be used for the preservation of
evidence, for discovering the origin of counterfeiting goods, but it can
also consist in the prohibition to use the contentious work, which will
probably be the most useful in software cases[^1194].

#### Criminal proceedings {#_criminal_proceedings}

Along with civil proceedings that can be initiated in case of breach of
a FOSS license, the claimant may also press criminal charges against the
potential infringer in front of a criminal court. There will be criminal
proceedings only if initiated by the right holder, unless the infringer
acted professionally in which case the judicial authorities can charge
him/her automatically, and a crime will be found only if the infringer
acted *intentionally*[^1195]. A new unified criminal procedure code also
came into force on January 1st, 2011, and is now applied by all cantons
in all criminal cases.

Recommended literature or websites {#_recommended_literature_or_websites}
----------------------------------

For more information about Open Source software and applicable Swiss
law, we recommend the following specialized literature:

-   Mike J. Widmer, Open Source Software — Urheberrechtliche Aspekte
    freier Software, Stämpfli, Bern 2003.

-   Gianni Fröhlich-Bleuler, Urheber - und vertragsrechtliche Aspekte
    der Open Source Software, in: Jörg/Arter, IT-Verträge, Bern 2007.

-   Gianni Fröhlich-Bleuler, Die neue Version des GNU Public License, in
    Jusletter 21. Juli 2008.

-   Ursula Widmer, Gutachten betreffend Rechtsfragen bei Beschaffung und
    Einsatz offener Software in des Schweizerisches Bundesverwaltung
    (Projekt OPUS).

Taiwan {#chap.taiwan}
======

author:\[Lin,Lucien Cheng-Hsia\]

Introduction to software protection under Taiwan law {#sec_introductiontaiwan}
----------------------------------------------------

### Body of law {#sec_bodytaiwan}

Copyright protection of software in Taiwan is regulated under the
general Copyright Act of 10 Feb. 2010. Instead of drafting specialized
regulations for computer programs, the legislature in Taiwan made all
related norms and standards merge into the established provisions in
Copyright Act[^1196].

The civil and commercial legislative system in Taiwan is designed as one
integrated infrastructure. This means when it comes to copyright
protection and infringement issues, treatments and procedures should be
taken under the principles of the Civil Code[^1197]. However, some
articles of Copyright Act are also deemed as special provisions to the
general Criminal Code, that is to say, when a criminal prosecution of
unlawful copyright infringement has been impleaded by prosecutor,
Criminal Code as well as the Copyright Act should be put into reference.
Moreover, when the computer programs are involved in the commercial use,
the Consumer Protection Law[^1198] is the principal supplementary
regulations to general laws. Besides, when a copyright issue occurs in
Taiwan, there is also an optional dispute mediation procedure could be
chosen in the adjective law area, the details of this mediation
mechanism are defined in the Regulations of Copyright Dispute
Mediation[^1199], in brief, considering that the formal lawsuit abiding
by the Intellectual Property Case Adjudication Act[^1200], Taiwan Code
of Civil Procedure[^1201], and The Code of Criminal Procedure[^1202]
might take litigants too much time and expense, both parties in a
copyright dispute event could choose this mediation procedure in
consensus as an alternative solution. After a settlement of the
mediation has been reached and ratified[^1203] by the Intellectual
Property Court, the written mediation settlement statement shall have
the same force as a final and unappeasable court judgment and constitute
a writ of execution by itself as well.

### Copyright Act: Object of protection {#sec_protectiontaiwan}

Computer programs are protected by copyrights as one special work in the
intellectual domain similar to literary and artistic creation, this is
declared in article 5, paragraph 1, subparagraph 10 of the Copyright Act
as *“Works means a creation within an intellectual domain and shall
include Computer programs.”*  However, there aren’t many details being
told in the Copyright Act about scales of creativities for copyright
qualified computer programs. The only specific clause can be referred is
article 3, *“Work protected by Copyright Act means a creation that is
within a literary, scientific, artistic, or other intellectual
domain.”*  Deduced from article 3, legal doctrine established that the
originality is still needed to be seen for a computer program pursuing
copyright protection, because the originality is the very essence of
creation in intellectual domain. However, how intensive the originality
should be and by which method it could be measured is yet to be
extensive interpreted. By now, analyzed on most rulings by the courts
and most comments from the jurists, there is only one clear line has
been drawn on this topic, that is sweat of the brow doctrine should not
be applied directly without proper elaboration in copyright area[^1204],
which means, pure labour service output without originalities should not
be deemed as intellectual creation, although the threshold of
originality for copyright protection is fairly low by the courts, it is
still obliged to be found nevertheless.

Moreover, as it says in article 10-1 of the Copyright Act: *“Protection
for copyrights that has been obtained in accordance with this Act shall
only extend to the expression of the work in question, and shall not
extend to the work’s underlying ideas, procedures, production processes,
systems, methods of operation, concepts, principles, or discoveries.”* 
This principle applies to computer programs like other copyright works.
Generally speaking, two fundamental points should be sustained on
computer programs for copyright protection, which are: (i) Producing
process of the computer program doesn’t only consist of merely
registering or copying the reality or executing a functional routine.
(ii) The originality involved in the computer program is required to
make it qualified as an own intellectual creation of the author, no
matter how minor the originality is.

### Authors/Beneficiaries {#sec_authorstaiwan}

Article 11 and 12 of the Copyright Act provide that the author of a
computer program should be the one who actually does the design and
writing of the program, whether the author is completing the work as an
employee within the scope of a persistent employment or as a contractor
under a task-based commission. In most cases the author refers to the
software engineer of a computer program, if it does have freedom of
development when creating the work. As for the economic rights to the
work, they belong to the employer in an employment relation, and to the
contractor in a task-based commission. However, either in the employment
relation or in the commission cooperation, all the assignments of
authorship attribution and economic right allocation could be
prearranged by a contractual agreement between both parties. Namely, in
order to find out and make confirmation about which party is the one
that authorship should be attributed to or economic rights should be
adhered to, details of the contract of employment or commission need to
be fully revealed to that purpose. Additionally, according to article
12, paragraph 3 of the Copyright Act: *“Where the economic rights are
enjoyed by the commissioned person pursuant to the provisions of the
preceding paragraph, the commissioning party may exploit the work.”* 
That is to say, if there isn’t any prearrangement in contract for
authorship and economic rights between the opposite commissioning
parties, then authorship and economic rights of the computer program
would be appointed to the contractor as a default arrangement. However,
the commissioning party does pay remuneration to the contractor for the
work to compensate its offering, this clause makes a supplementary
explanation for its lawful exploitation status on the work, whether this
privilege is recorded in writing or not, it applies to the commissioning
party as well at law.

### Exclusive rights {#sec_exclusivetaiwan}

The exclusive economic rights defined by the Copyright Act are listed
from article 22 to 29, the whole package included (a) reproduce the
work, (b) publicly recite the work, (c) publicly broadcast the work, (d)
publicly present the work, (e) publicly perform the work, (f) transmit
the work to the public, (g) publicly display the work, (h) adapt the
work into derivative ones or (i) compile the work into compilation ones,
(j) distribute the works through transfer of ownership, and (k) rent the
work. Although all these rights are not fit in computer programs in
theory and in essence, on account of computer programs are treated equal
to other copyright works under the Copyright Act without specific
differences, all the exclusive rights listed above could be covered in
the software area, as long as it is applied in a realizable way.

### Exceptions to exclusive rights {#sec_exceptionstaiwan}

Besides making a legal plea and excuse by asserting the fair use
doctrine based on article 44 to 66 as limitations to exclusive rights,
there is only one general exception applied in the Taiwan Copyright Act,
which is the first sale doctrine under the jurisdiction of Taiwan. It is
expressly provided by article 59-1 of the Copyright Act: *“A person who
has obtained ownership of the original of a work or a lawful copy
thereof within the territory under the jurisdiction of the Republic of
China may distribute it by means of transfer of ownership.”*  All the
copyright works apply to this provision, as well as computer programs.
Hence, when a computer program was attached to a storage medium, or
physical product, machine, and similar equipment, then be lawfully
transferred to others with rightholder’s consent, this transaction shall
exhaust the distribution right of that copy of computer program under
the jurisdiction of Taiwan, with the exception of the right to control
further rental of the program if it is incorporated to a physical
product, machine, and equipment rather than a simple storage medium,
according to article 60, paragraph 2 in the same Act.

Other exceptions specific for computer programs are set forth in article
59 of the Copyright Act, *“(i) The owner of a legal copy of a computer
program may alter the program where necessary for utilization on a
machine used by such owner, or may reproduce the program as necessary
for backup; provided, this is limited to the owner’s personal use. (ii)
If the owner referred to in the preceding paragraph loses ownership of
the original copy for any reason other than the destruction or loss of
the copy, all altered and backup copies shall be destroyed unless the
economic rights holder grants its consent otherwise.”*  article 59 cited
above is deemed as compulsory law. Therefore, contractual agreements in
conflict with that are held to be nonexistence.

### Moral rights {#sec_moraltaiwan}

Moral rights are highly valued by the Copyright Act in Taiwan and
applied to computer programs if realizable in essence like other
copyright works as well. As expressed in article 21 and 18 of the
Copyright Act, moral rights belong exclusively to the author and shall
not be transferred or succeeded. Moreover, the protection of moral
rights of an author who has died or been extinguished shall be treated
the same as the author was alive or in existence and shall not be
infringed upon by any person.

In other words, moral rights are deemed as the “specific exclusive
rights without transferability” in Taiwan. That is to say, when the
authorship attribution of a copyright work has been made, moral rights
adhered to that authorship shall not be changed or transferred to other
person or legal entity by any means, and it remains in force after the
transfer of the proprietary rights and following the death of the author
for evermore.

According to article 16 of the Civil Code, moral rights are generally
considered to be an essential legal capacity, and declared to be not
permitted to waive in Taiwan. Although they are treated as inalienable
rights, this does not mean that it is impossible for rightholder to
renounce under certain circumstances. From the standpoints explained in
official documents issued by the Ministry of the Interior in
Taiwan[^1205], global renouncement of the future exercise of moral
rights should be void. However, if the renouncement of the scope could
be stipulated with well-defined boundaries, such as subject, duration,
and applied area being prearranged for the renouncement, the
renouncement of moral rights could be validly sustained. In other words,
the “Principle of Freedom of Contract” shall be honored.

Moral rights protected by the Copyright Act in Taiwan consist of three
parts:

Right of publicly release

:   *The author of a work shall enjoy the right to publicly release the
    work* provided by article 15 of the Copyright Act;

Right of paternity

:   *The author of a work shall have the right to indicate its name, a
    pseudonym, or no name on the original or copies of the work, or when
    the work is publicly released. The author has the same right to a
    derivative work based on its work* provided by article 16 of the
    Copyright Act;'

Right of integrity

:   *The author has the right to prohibit others from distorting,
    mutilating, modifying, or otherwise changing the content, form, or
    name of the work, thereby damaging the author’s reputation* provided
    by article 17 of the Copyright Act.

### Term of protection {#sec_termtaiwan}

For economic rights of computer programs, the same terms to works of
literature, science, and art apply: 50 years as of December 31 following
the death of the author, and if the economic rights in work are
appointed to a legal entity, the 50 years duration should be counting
from the day that work is publicly released. In case of co-authors,
economic rights in a joint work subsist for 50 years after the death of
the last surviving author. More details about the duration of economic
rights could be provided in article 30, 31, 33, and 35 of the Copyright
Act. However, there is no limited term of protection for moral rights of
copyright works including computer programs. This is clearly declared in
article 18 of the Copyright Act. However, in the latter part of the same
article also emphasizes that *“After the death of the author, an act
shall not constitute an infringement where it can be considered that the
author’s intent has not been contravened given the nature and degree of
the act of exploitation, social changes, or other circumstances.”* 
Hence, moral rights of copyrights shall not perish after the death of
the author, but it would, to some extent, be applied in a more moderated
and compromised way.

### Copyright assignment {#sec_assignmenttaiwan}

As mentioned previously about the default setting by article 11 and 12
of the Copyright Act, the authorship of a computer program is attributed
to whom actually does the design and writing of it, and the economic
rights are allocated to the employer in a persistent employment relation
and to the contractor in a task-based commission. Nevertheless, all the
assignments above could be transposed on a preconcerted contractual
agreement. When the authorship and economic rights have been attributed
and allocated at law or by a contractual agreement, moral rights are
adhered to the authorship and can not be succeeded or transferred
thereafter. However, there are no such restrictions imposed on economic
rights, according to article 36 of the Copyright Act *“Economic rights
may be transferred in whole or in part to another person and may be
jointly owned with other persons.”* 

Generally speaking, economic rights of copyrights assignment procedure
in Taiwan were made in a very flexible and customized way. Some people
might even regard it as under a loose legal control. Because there are
actually no any legal formalities required for an economic right
assignment in Taiwan, none of them are asked by the Copyright Act and
Civil Code. Although, according to article 116 of the Civil Code and
article 4 of the Electronic Signatures Act, both parties in a economic
right assignment agreement can still stipulate certain formalities by
themselves, even the formalities are provided in an electronic record
way could be served properly. However, if the parties did not arrange
any definite form for the economic right assignment, the agreement will
still be valid, even if it is agreed between the parties as a consensual
contract. Even so, article 36, paragraph 3 of the Copyright Act
expresses that *“The scope of the transfer of the economic rights shall
be as stipulated by the parties; rights not clearly covered by such
stipulations shall be presumed to have not been transferred.”*  In terms
of that, although the economic right assignment could be made valid on
the condition of a consensual contract, people still tend to make the
agreement on a written document or through a similar method like that to
preserve the related information as many as possible in order to clearly
record the details of the stipulations.

### Special measures {#sec_measurestaiwan}

Some articles of Copyright Act are deemed as special provisions to the
general Criminal Code, those provisions applied to computer programs
like other copyright works. In that case, when a legal complaint about
copyright infringements has been submitted by the rightholder to the
authority, and has been evaluated as an intentional offence by
prosecutor, the prosecutor who undertakes this issue can therefore
initiate the prosecution based on article 91 to 100 of the Copyright Act
to place the proper criminal responsibilities on the infringer involved.
The criminal punishment for copyright infringements varies with
different accusations being charged. For a overall but not precise
description, the most serious punishment could be imposed would be
imprisonment for no more than 5 years, detention, or in lieu thereof or
in addition thereto a fine not more than 5 million New Taiwan Dollars.
However, if the benefit obtained by the infringer exceeds the maximum
fine, article 96-2 of the Copyright Act hereon could be applied by court
to increase the fine limitation to the whole obtained benefit. Besides
that, according to article 103 of the Copyright Act: Upon complaint or
information of an infringement of a person’s copyrights, judicial police
officials or judicial police may seize the infringing works to cease the
ongoing unlawful infringements.

Except for the substantive law, when it comes to disputes concerning
copyrights or plate rights, there is also one special measure could be
taken in the adjective law area, which is the optional conciliation
process regulated by the Regulations of Copyright Dispute Mediation in
Taiwan. Both parties in a copyright dispute could choose this mediation
procedure in consensus as an alternative solution to the normal
litigation procedure. After a settlement of the mediation has been
reached and ratified as not contrary to act, regulation, public order,
good morals, and compulsory executabilities by the Intellectual Property
Court, the written mediation settlement statement shall have the same
force as a final and unappealable court judgment and constitute a writ
of execution by itself as well.

Unprotected software and public domain software {#sec_publicdomaintaiwan}
-----------------------------------------------

As set forth above, two fundamental criteria should be met on computer
programs for the copyright protection, which are: (i) Producing process
of the computer program doesn’t only consist of merely registering or
copying the reality or executing a functional routine. (ii) The
originality involved in the computer program is required to make it
qualified as an own intellectual creation of the author, no matter how
minor the originality is. As a matter of fact, the threshold of
originality for copyright protection is fairly low, therefore most of
the computer programs shall be protected by copyrights, no matter
whether it is made in a proprietary software mode or under a Free and
Open Source Software (hereinafter abbreviated as the “FOSS”) license.

Opposite to the computer programs with copyright protection, there are
also softwares which are not protected under certain circumstances
described in article 42 and 43 of the Copyright Act. Briefly speaking,
economic rights of computer programs are extinguished upon expiration of
the term of protection, this kind of extinguishment applies to the
situation that economic rights holder has died or been extinguished
without any inheritors other than the nation or a local government.
After the extinguishment, any person may freely exploit the computer
programs without any legal restrictions. In fact, the common used word
“Public Domain” or its synonyms are not declared in the Taiwan Copyright
Act, however, most legal critics agree that the sentence used in article
43 as *“Any person may freely exploit a work for which the economic
rights have been extinguished”*  is a very much equivalent expression to
the same thing.

Even so, there is still one thing needed further discussion and
confirmation: whether the economic rights of copyrights can be abandoned
by their rightholders in advance to make the work into the area of
Public Domain earlier. This question has not been fully answered by the
Copyright Act directly. However, in legal theory, the property rights
are always not be categorized as the “specifically exclusive rights
without transferability” defined in article 16 of Civil Code. Moreover,
according to article 40, paragraph 2 of the Copyright Act, an author of
a joint work is expressly allowed at law to abandon its share of the
ownership to other co-authors of the work. Therefore, if we apply this
clause mutatis mutandis to article 42 of the Copyright Act, the
deduction we shall find is that when all the authors have abandoned
their economic rights in a joint work, the work shall hence be allocated
into the Public Domain. Based on this very standpoint, an author who
makes a work by its own can theoretically abandon the economic rights of
that in the same way. Namely, economic rights of computer programs shall
be allowed to be abandoned by the rightholders before expiration of the
term of protection. In other words, the abandoning statements made by
the rightholders will render computer programs as unprotected softwares,
and therefore into the Public Domain area.

Analysis of FOSS under Taiwan law {#sec_analysistaiwan}
---------------------------------

Provided by article 10 of the Copyright Act, author of a work shall
enjoy copyrights upon completion of the work. That means when a creation
is completed, the author doesn’t have to apply for extra registration or
to go through any process, because with the essential originality the
work will be subjected to copyright protection automatically. This is
so-called “self-executing protection principle on copyrights”. From this
standpoint, computer programs with certain originalities should be
protected by copyrights automatically, whether they are accomplished by
a single author or by multiple authors cooperating under the FOSS
licensing architecture.

When it comes to FOSS license analysis in the common law system,
discussion upon differences between “bare license” to “bilateral
contract” usually occurs. This analysis template might be one thing of
importance in the applicable common law system. However, it doesn’t seem
to bring out much practical influence on the legal system in Taiwan. As
a matter of fact, there are still some legal theory discussions about
the differences between unilateral act, bilateral act, unilateral
contract, and bilateral contract for the juridical acts, but most of
those discussions remain as academic subjects. Judging from the fact
that in Taiwan “bare license” is lacking of corresponding mechanisms
either in substantive law or in adjective law, and in reality most
courts always treat the computer program utilization agreement as a
copyright contract, hereunder when it comes to analysis of FOSS, the
FOSS licenses themselves will be treated as contracts and the licensing
modes based on that will be reviewed from the fundamental copyright
regulations to supplementary contract stipulations. In a nutshell, the
FOSS licenses deviate a lot from conventional license agreements that
under the law in Taiwan, they should be considered as the sui generis
license agreements based on the same fundamental copyright mechanisms
but adjusted to some extent by contractual agreements for matching a new
collaborative development methodology.

### Copyrights {#sec_copyrightstaiwan}

One very essential problem to the FOSS project is that it is made with
accumulated multiple authors with or without coordination. On account of
that, to well apply the current copyright regulations onto it could be a
very challenging task because the cooperation methodologies operated in
FOSS project might not be foreseeing and taking into consideration when
the copyright regulations was enacted by the legislators. Generally
speaking, a FOSS project could be deemed as a joint work in article 8 of
Copyright Act in Taiwan or a derivative work in article 6 depending on
which one fits the real situation most for the FOSS project. However,
neither the joint work type nor the derivative work type could one
hundred percent match the reality of a FOSS project.

Take the joint work for example, the feature for cooperation between
multiple authors is equally found in a conventional joint computer
program and FOSS project. However, most people think it is necessary
that a joint work should be made by co-authors in consultation. In other
words, there must be certain interactions and communications among the
co-authors for the composition of a joint creation. Judging from that,
quite a number of FOSS projects actually do not have anything to do with
this prerequisite. In fact, many participants of a FOSS project might
just take part in the code committing merely under the same coding style
and licensing rules without knowing each other. This is so-called
“Cooperation without Coordination”[^1206] mechanism of the FOSS
projects. From this point of view, the type of joint work defined by the
current Copyright Act can’t not cover all the well-known features of a
FOSS project.

If we take the derivative work into consideration, the feature for
continuing modifications to the original work is identically proved in a
conventional derivative computer program and a FOSS project. However,
most people think it is fundamentally required that a derivative work
should be made with certain originalities to some extent, that is, there
must be quite a bit creativities comparing to the original work for a
ratification. Rethinking on this, quite a number of FOSS projects
actually do not make modifications by that standard. As a matter of
fact, many contributions committed to a FOSS project might just be taken
as a bug fix or merely a patch being made of scripts without copyright
protection on it. However, accumulated by all these little by little and
piece by piece, many small contributions might eventually make a
copyrights-meaningful derivative improvement. From this point of view,
the type of derivative work defined by the current Copyright Act can’t
not explain all the details well about when is the proper counting point
that a derivative work to an original FOSS project has been made.

Roughly speaking, take the FOSS project into application, depending on
its development process and phase, as a joint work or a derivative work
under the Copyright Act in Taiwan could be doable without conflicts with
legal regulations in essence. In fact, some FOSS projects are
collaboratively or derivatively accomplished exactly in this way. Yet,
either the copyright type of the joint work or the derivative work can
not sufficiently express the features of a FOSS project in operation. Be
on a eclectically thinking about this, for a FOSS project copyright
application in Taiwan, it can be deemed as a joint work or a derivative
work of the Copyright Act in the first place based on its development
situation. Secondly, it shall follow up in accordance with its
supplementary stipulations under the respective FOSS licenses. This
might be a much more rational and workable way for an overall copyright
protection on FOSS projects for the time being.

### Qualification of FOSS {#sec_qualificationtaiwan}

As mentioned above, with the essential originality the computer programs
will be subjected to copyright protection automatically, this is clearly
stated in the article 5, paragraph 1, subparagraph 10 and article 10 of
the Copyright Act in Taiwan. Referring to current copyright types of the
Copyright Act, an indivisible computer program made by multiple
participants concurringly in the same period of time could be
categorized as a joint work, and a modified computer program qualified
for originalities made by multiple participants separately in different
period of time could be categorized as a derivative work. However, most
people think it is necessary that a joint work should be made by
co-authors in consultation, and a derivative work should be made with
certain originalities to some extent. With regard to these two criteria,
some FOSS projects might not be able to pass the evaluation in full.

In that case, according to article 1 of the Civil Code[^1207], one can
always apply the related provisions mutatis mutandis for a better
resolution in the civil law area. That is to say, if a FOSS project
fulfills the whole legal requirements as to the joint work or to the
derivative work of the Copyright Act, then it shall be protected as its
respectively proper copyright type. However, there might be some
features of the FOSS project can not well expressed and put into
practice only by the statutory provisions. This is where the contractual
stipulations should be stepping in. Because only with the complementary
circulation between the Copyright Act and specific FOSS licensing
agreement should the FOSS licensing mode be able to operate smoothly as
it sets to be.

#### Rights of the original co-authors {#sec_cooauthorstaiwan}

Provided in article 8 of the Copyright Act *“A joint work is a work that
has been completed by two or more persons where the creation of each
person cannot be separately exploited.”*  According to that, a computer
program can be estimated as a joint work when it is made by multiple
authors with certain interactions and communications for the cooperation
among them, and can therefore apply all the related provisions about the
joint work of the Copyright Act for its utilization. By and large, when
a computer program is deemed to be a joint work, the moral rights and
economic rights upon it shall be owned and utilized in a sharing status.
The details of moral rights utilization is provided in article 19 of the
Copyright Act. And the explanation of economic rights exploitation is
regulated in article 40 and 40-1 of the same Act. To be brief, in a
sharing status of jointly moral rights and jointly economic rights on
copyrights, all the rights in a computer program shall not be exercised
except with the consent of all the joint rights holders. However, any
one of the joint rights holders shall not be allowed to refuse this very
consent without a legitimate reason. In addition, the joint rights
holders of a computer program may select a representative among
themselves to exercise their joint rights, either in the moral rights or
in the economic rights aspect. However, there is still one crucial
difference can be told between the jointly moral rights and the jointly
economic rights. That is in article 40, paragraph 1 of the Copyright Act
which expressly stated that there is certain sharing proportion
mechanism defined for the jointly economic rights. These definitions
include *“In the case of a joint work, each author’s share of the
ownership of such a work shall be as stipulated by the joint authors;
where no stipulation has been made, ownership shares shall be determined
according to the degree of each author’s creative contribution. Where
the degree of each author’s creative contribution is not clear, it shall
be presumed that each author owns an equal share.”*  However, this kind
of sharing proportion mechanism is generally believed to be nonexistence
in the jointly moral rights area. Because the moral rights are consisted
of right of publicly release, right of paternity, and right of
integrity, none of these three rights can be transferred from the owner
to others, or be splited in part as well. On account of that, most
people agree that the sharing proportion mechanism only works for the
jointly economic rights. As for the jointly moral rights, every
co-author should be treated equally and equitably in pari causa.

Although the joint rights of copyrights can only be exercised with the
consent of all joint rights holders, there is still one exception
provided in article 90 of the Copyright Act, that is, each holder of
copyrights in a joint work may separately institute legal proceedings
for an infringement of copyrights and demand remedies from the
infringer, either acting as a moral rights holder or based on its share
of economic rights ownership.

#### Authors of derivative works {#sec_derivstaiwan}

Regulated in article 6 of the Copyright Act *“A creation adapted from
one or more pre-existing works is a derivative work and shall be
protected as an independent work.”*  According to that, a computer
program can be judged as a derivative work when it is made by the
modifier with certain creativities comparing to the pre-existing one,
and can hence apply all the related provisions about the derivative work
of the Copyright Act for its exploitation. According to article 28 of
the Copyright Act, the authors of the pre-existing/original computer
programs have the exclusive right to adapt their works into derivative
works or to compile their works into compilation works, this
prerequisite is fairly fulfilled by the FOSS licensing agreements.
Because all the FOSS licenses clearly stated that the rights to modify,
copy, and distribute copies of the FOSS projects will be granted to the
recipients. Moreover, the derivative work will be protected as an
independent one as article 6 of the Copyright Act provides, that is to
say, when the derivative work has been made lawfully, the only right the
original authors can perform is to indicate its name, a pseudonym, or no
name on the derivative copies when they are publicly released. However,
sometimes the later version of a FOSS project is just taking an
unmodified adoption from the pre-existing project such as library
components, and adding some new independent functionalities to interact
with the adoption part through a predefined application program
interface. Such an adoption should be deemed as a derivative work, a
compound work, or even a compilation work arises some discussions in
Taiwan, but no solid conclusion has been reached so far. Judging from
the fact that in Taiwan there is actually no copyright type defined as
compound work like German law does, the adoption mentioned above can
therefore be deemed as a derivative work under conventional explanation,
or a compilation work while the adoption is quite separative so as not
to be treated as an adaption. And if it does have been categorized as a
compilation one, it will still be protected as an independent work
according to article 7, paragraph 1 of the Copyright Act. Even so, there
is still certain difference between a derivative FOSS project and a
compilation FOSS project, which is the copyrights included are basically
commingled into a derivative work, yet not to a compilation one. In that
case, if the recipients want to do modification directly to a specific
FOSS component inside the compilation, it should still be proceeded
under the rules stipulated by the respective license agreement of the
component in question.

Except for the name indicating right has been expressly reserved for the
original authors at law, sometimes the original authors will also impose
some other contractual obligations by the FOSS license agreements. The
related information about the validity and enforcement of those
impositions will be presented later in the “Copyright principle” section
of this chapter.

#### The assignment of copyrights {#sec_assignmenttaiwan2}

In order to gather all related copyrights in a FOSS project to make an
efficient management or timely disposal of the FOSS project, sometimes
the copyright holders will transfer or set up a trust on their rights to
a sustained legal entity such as a foundation. On account of that, all
the rights of the FOSS project could be governed by the hands of
full-time specialists employed by the legal entity. The collective
management of copyrights is perfectly possible and doable under Taiwan
law. According to article 21 and 36 of the Copyright Act, economic
rights of copyrights can be transferred in whole or in part to another
natural person or legal entity, only if the details of the transferring
have been clearly recorded between the both parties. Besides that,
according to article 1 and 2 of the Trust Law[^1208], a right of
property can be transferred to the trustee for administration or
disposal purposes by a contract. Furthermore, none of the legal
formalities are required at law for an economic right transfer or
fiduciary contract in Taiwan. And if both parties agree, according to
the Electronic Signatures Act[^1209], the contract can also be made in
an electronic record way without losing its validities. In a nutshell,
the assignment of economic rights of copyrights for a FOSS project could
be successfully sustained at law in Taiwan, there isn’t any known legal
conflicts with the assignments.

In fact, provided by article 81 of the Copyright Act, economic rights
holders may, with the approval of the Intellectual Property Office,
establish copyright collective management organizations for the purpose
of exercising rights or for collecting and distributing compensation for
use. Details about this copyright collective management organization can
be found in the Copyright Collective Management Organization Act[^1210].
Although this Act is currently put into practice mainly for
organizations dabbling in pop music or motion pictures, the computer
program is nevertheless not excluding from the applicable list.
Therefore, building a copyright collective management organization
devoted to one or multiple FOSS projects, to initiate management actions
and other civil, criminal, and administrative suits and complaints, is
actually quite feasible and practicable at law in Taiwan.

### Moral copyrights {#sec_moralcrtaiwan}

As aforementioned, moral rights of copyrights are highly valued by the
Copyright Act in Taiwan and they applied to computer programs as well as
other copyright works. Moral rights here consists of three parts, right
of publicly release, right of paternity, and right of integrity on a
copyright work. They belong exclusively to the author and shall not be
transferred or succeeded. And the protection of moral rights of an
author who has died or been extinguished shall be treated as remaining.
In general legal theories and official explanation letters by the
authorities, global renouncement of the future exercise of moral rights
should be deemed as void, yet the renouncement can still be sustained at
law if its scope could be stipulated with details such as subject,
duration, or applied area information. After the brief review of moral
rights protection in Taiwan, one might wonder if we put the FOSS
licensing principles in perspective, will the FOSS licensing principles
and the moral rights protection rules be in conflict with each other in
a way? It seems that the protection duration won’t expire for the moral
rights. Yet according to Open Source Definition specified by Open Source
Initiative article 5 and 6, the author of software distributed under a
FOSS license can not oppose the use of the software by certain people
and groups or for certain areas of application. So if the author of a
FOSS project does declare his everlasting moral rights to lift a ban on
certain use of that computer program, will it cause a compromising
solution between the moral rights protection and the FOSS licensing
principles?

As a matter of fact, such a conflict shall not happen under most
circumstances according to the restrictive interpretation of article 17
of the Copyright Act. In this very article, it regulates that *“The
author has the right to prohibit others from distorting, mutilating,
modifying, or otherwise changing the content, form, or name of the work,
thereby damaging the author’s reputation.”*  This provision mainly
applies onto literature works for the most part. Although it can also be
covered on computer program, with regard to technical neutralities
embodied in the computer programs, a purely functional adaption or
modification should not be deemed as distorting, mutilating, modifying
works in reputation damaging way to the original author. Moreover, when
the original author participates voluntarily in a FOSS project, it is
evidently well understood to it that utilization purpose later on to the
FOSS project will not be limited. This understanding could be fairly
deemed as one acknowledged renouncement of its moral rights with scope
revelation and explanation.

### Enforcing FOSS licenses licenses {#sec_enforcingtaiwan}

As mentioned previously, due to the lack of corresponding mechanisms
either in substantive law or in adjective law for the unilateral act,
most courts in Taiwan tend to treat the computer programs utilization
agreement directly as a copyright contract dealing with right and duty
allocation. Therefore, when it comes to analysis on FOSS licenses
validity and enforcement, the licenses themselves will be judged as
contracts in most cases. In view of that, as long as the FOSS
contractual agreement can be lawfully sustained and can be put into
operation, the license carried on that will also be deemed as valid and
enforceable. So there are two essential questions needed to be heeded:
(i) between whom is a contract reached and when it is reached, and (ii)
has the contract been validly reached with all the legal formalities
required? Based on these two points, we shall further the analysis on
the FOSS licenses validity and enforceability hereunder.

#### Contracting parties {#sec_partiestaiwan}

According to article 153, paragraph 1 of the Civil Code *“When the
parties have reciprocally declared their concordant intent, either
expressly or impliedly, a contract shall be constituted.”*  So, for a
contractually based analysis on the FOSS project, two fundamental
questions should be answered, which are: (i) between whom is a contract
reached, and (ii) upon when is the intent mutually declared and
accepted?

About the first question, if the FOSS project in question is made by a
single author, then the answer will be much easier to clarify: the
contract has been constituted between the original author and the
respective recipients to the FOSS project. And when it comes to multiple
authors, the answer will become a little bit indirect to perceive. But
if the multiple authors did contribute to the FOSS project in an
intensive consultation way, then the project itself will be deemed as a
joint work at law. Therefore, the contract has been constituted between
all the co-authors in accordance and the respective recipients to the
FOSS project. And if the project has been modified by the successive
participant with notable originalities, it can be treated as a
derivative work at law. Hence, the contract has been constituted between
the successive author and the respective recipients to the derivative
FOSS project. However, if there is actually no any tangibly consultative
relation between the multiple participants, or the very FOSS project has
been modified repeatedly with slight contribution without certain
originalities, or even the whole project was made in combination with
the other FOSS component as a simple adoption without much modification
between the two parts, all these described above will lead to a much
more complicated situation. Briefly speaking, all the three hypotheses
can not easily be explained in full according to the current Copyright
Act, either in its copyright type categorization or in copyright
management and disposal aspect. Even so, most of the FOSS licenses have
been proved to be of assistance to deal with those puzzles, with the
help of its complementary contractual stipulations. Take MIT license and
Apache License 2.0 of BSD-like FOSS licenses for example, in these two
licenses sublicense mechanism on copyright[^1211] is expressly provided,
therefore no matter how far the modification to an original MIT License
or Apache-2.0 project has been reached, the modifier will always be
entitled to license a derivative work or merely a modification one in
its own name. Moreover, although there is no such a sublicense mechanism
provided on copyrights in GPL-like FOSS licenses like GNU General Public
License v2.0, v3.0, GNU Lesser General Public License v2.1, v3.0, and
GNU Affero General Public License v3.0, a license relay mechanism has
been well explained in similar way of these license agreements. Take
GPL-3.0 for example, “Each time you convey a covered work, the recipient
automatically receives a license from the original licensors, to run,
modify and propagate that work, subject to this License.” To be brief,
the aforementioned sublicense mechanism and this kind of automatic
licensing to downstream recipients have made up a deficiency to the
Copyright Act regulations for FOSS projects, on account of those
complementary stipulations: the contracting parties of a FOSS project
under a complicated circumstance shall therefore be able to be defined
on a case by case basis.

As for the second question, according to article 161, paragraph 1 and 2
of the Civil Code, *“In cases where according to customs or owing to the
nature of the affair, a notice of acceptance is not necessary, the
contract shall be constituted when, within a reasonable time, there is a
fact, which may be considered as an acceptance of the offer. The
provision of the preceding paragraph shall be mutatis mutandis applied
when at the time of offer the offerer has waived notice of
acceptance.”*  Judging from the provisions above, a contract in Taiwan
could be deemed as concurring reached and constituted, if the notice of
acceptance is pre-declared to be fulfilled by action similar to a
tangible reply. This is exactly what is happening among the FOSS
contractually licensing relations. Most of the FOSS licenses do consist
of this kind of waivers of acceptance notice, take GPL-3.0 for example,
*“by modifying or propagating a covered work, you indicate your
acceptance of this License to do so.”*  In this way both parties of the
FOSS licensing contract have made their intent mutually reached and
concordant. Therefore when a FOSS project has been received and
exploited by the recipients, upon that time the contract between the
rightholders and the respective recipients shall be validly sustained at
law.

#### Validity of the FOSS licenses {#sec_validitytaiwan}

For the full validity of a contract, not only the intent should be
reached concordantly between both parties, but also the contents and
formalities must be deemed as not contradicted to the regulations at
law. In Taiwan, the legal principles of validities of a juridical act
are basically provided in article 71, 72, and 73 of the Civil Code. And
all the principles mentioned hereunder are equally applied to the
contract as well as a type of the juridical act, such as:

Article 71

:   *A juridical act which violates an imperative or prohibitive
    provision of the act is void except voidance is not implied in
    the provision.*

Article 72

:   *A juridical act which is against public policy or morals is void.*

Article 73

:   *A juridical act which does not follow the formality required by the
    act is void unless otherwise provided by the act.*

Moreover, because of the “All Rights Reserved” principle set forth by
the Copyright Act, exploiting computer programs without the author’s
expressly consent could be a copyright violation. That means without a
legal license, the utilization of softwares downloaded from the internet
could jeopardize oneself in the danger of a copyright infringement. And
even the user claims that the softwares in question were received as
they have already been put into Public Domain, when the legal issues
arouse this will still need to be proved by the user. As a result, most
people will not try to dispute the very existence and validity for a
FOSS contract if they just receive this FOSS project without other legal
stands. Because if they do assert that the FOSS contract between the
authors to them don’t exist, then this implies no legally valid
copyright license has been granted to them, and the users hence might
not be able to use those softwares at all. Judging from the legal
deductions and case analyses above, the contractual FOSS license
agreements should be sustained at law and therefore be able to be
enforced without disputes in Taiwan.

Contractual stipulations contrary to these three articles are deemed not
to exist. On the other hand, if none of the regulations above have been
violated, then according to article 153 of the Civil Code, both parties
in a contract relation can therefore constitute an agreement to exchange
and distribute their duties and rights freely on their own. The doctrine
is treated as the “Principle of Freedom of Contract” in Taiwan. Judging
from the fact that the composition of a FOSS contract has nothing in
conflict with any compulsory regulations as being mentioned in article
71 and take the public policies and good morals into consideration as
being asked in article 72, such an uncertain legal concept can only be
further explained on a case by case basis. On account of that, a FOSS
contract won’t violate this provision directly only because the
utilization based on that contract is unlimited in purposes. Finally,
none of the legal formalities are required at law for an economic right
transfer or disposal contract in Taiwan. So neither being made in
writing, notarization, nor other formalities is demanded in a FOSS
contract. That is to say, the contract made in FOSS licensing way also
doesn’t have any inconsistency to article 73 of the Civil Code. Briefly
speaking, a FOSS license contract is evaluated to be sustained according
to the “Principle of Freedom of Contract” and the reviewing based on the
three criteria listed above.

### Waiver and liability {#sec_waivertaiwan}

Typically, there will be certain exoneration clauses declared as a
disclaimer of warranty and limitation of liability in the FOSS licenses.
Those clauses relieve the authors and contributors of the FOSS project
from as many liabilities as possible. Judging from the fact that most of
the FOSS projects are distributed on a royalty-free basis, and put the
“Right and Duty Equity Principle” into consideration, this kind of
liability prerelease mechanism will be reasonably sustained at law to
some extent in Taiwan. However, it is explicitly demanded in article 222
of the Civil Code, that the *“Responsibility for intentional or gross
negligent acts shall not be released in advance.”*  Abide by that, if
respective one FOSS license does mean to relieve the authors and
contributors from all kinds of liabilities including the one that is
caused by an intentional or gross negligent act, the exceeding part
according to article 222 and 111 of the Civil Code will be deemed as
void at law. However, for this FOSS license, the other part within the
scope permitted at law shall remain valid. This “partly void yet partly
valid” mechanism presented in article 111 happens to echo article 7,
paragraph 2 of the GPL-2.0[^1212]. All in all, if the FOSS project is
distributed as noncommercial purpose and free of charge, then the
disclaimer of warranty and limitation of liability clauses will be
respected to a maximum extent. However, the responsibility for
intentional or gross negligent acts will not be relieved in advance, any
waivers come to this degree will be treated as void at law.

Even so, when it comes to commercial distribution with fees charged, the
question about whether the disclaimer of warranty and limitation of
liability can stand at law shall be examined and evaluated on a case by
case basis. Moreover, because of the preconcerted and fixed
characteristic of a FOSS license, the FOSS license itself could be
easily recognized as the “Standard Contract” defined in article 247-1 of
the Civil Code and article 12 of the Consumer Protection Law in Taiwan.
One of the legal effects of being treated as a standard contract is that
if the court finds that certain stipulations in the contract are turning
to be obviously unfair, such as releasing or reducing the responsibility
of one party and increasing the responsibility of the other party which
is contrary to the principle of the equality and reciprocity, it can be
declared as void directly by court at law. In view of article 354 and
355 of the Civil Code, it also tells that *“The seller of a thing shall
warrant that the thing sold is free from any defect in quality which may
destroy or impair its value, or its fitness for ordinary efficacy, or
its fitness for the efficacy of the contract of sale.”*  According to
this clause, when a FOSS project has been put to use as a selling
product, the prearranged disclaimer of warranty and limitation of
liability clauses would be regulated and modulated to a certain degree.
Unless the seller has already expressly revealed the defect to the
buyer, otherwise he will still be held responsible for the quality of it
offering. That a FOSS project being part of the offering or not does not
affect this legal demand on a compulsory basis.

### The copyleft principle {#sec_copylefttaiwan}

Copyleft is not necessarily an ideological term though it is indeed
created to make a contrast to the notion of copyright. Its discourse,
however, still works within the scope of the copyright basis. In other
words, the notion of copyleft can be summarized as “A way of sharing
that computer programs within the framework of the copyright system,
albeit in ways different from the common practices.” Based on that,
authors of FOSS projects can therefore still claim the rights given to
them by the copyright law and at the same time set the rules by
stipulations on how other people can use their works. Furthermore,
authors can only allow other people to perform applications,
modifications, and adaptations to the original computer programs on
condition that the distribution of the original and derivative works
would be in exactly the same way by a FOSS license agreement. So it is
assured that these works can continue their free circulation. This is
the central idea of the notion copyleft “Authors requiring their
original and derivative works to be continuously available under the
same rules to the public.”

#### Principle {#sec_principletaiwan}

The classic model of such a licensing mechanism is the respective
versions of GNU licenses[^1213] drafted by Free Software Foundation.
Some critics even give the characteristic supported by copyleft
principle in the GNU licenses a new term, such as “License Capture” or
“License Inheritance”. Take GPL for example, License Inheritance means
an adopter’s entire project might be considered as a derivative work of
a GPL-licensed component if one of the following conditions is fulfilled
when the adopter copies the codes either in source form way or in binary
form way from a GPL-licensed component into its ongoing software
project. First, the portion copied comprises a substantial part of the
software project; or second, the GPL-licensed component provides core
function for the software project and inseparably interacts with the
other components of such software project. If any of the conditions
above has been positively reached, then the software project in question
will be deemed as a creation adapted from the pre-existing GPL-licensed
component, therefore renders it as a derivative work of the GPL-licensed
component. As a result, the adopter can only distribute its accomplished
software project under the same GPL if it chooses to.

Frankly speaking, in the area of computer programs, defining the scope
of a “work based on the original work” has been recognized as relatively
challenging. This is because components in a mid or large size software
project often call or access each other to cooperate. In addition, when
different components are developed, each author may develop its own
components independently without consulting others for accessibility and
license compatibility. Unless the correlating and co-pending
relationships of different components are determined on a case by case
basis, it would be difficult to directly determine whether there is
actually such tight connection of inheritance and reliance so as to
determine whether the entire software project is derived from one
specific component.

Nevertheless, simply putting a GPL-licensed component into a software
project does not necessarily trigger its License Inheritance based on
the GPL. In fact, many users somehow misunderstood and thus wrongfully
interpreted the License Inheritance and used the “all-inclusive”
terminology as a simplified but not specified metaphor to describe the
License Inheritance effect. As a matter of fact, lots of the core
members and opinion leaders of the respective GPL projects have now and
then stated something similar: If a GPL-licensed component is not
strongly related to the other components in the entire software project,
it renders the License Inheritance of the GPL component as unable to be
expanded to the other components of the software project. Such
standpoints might include that the GPL-licensed component communicating
with the other components through a dynamic link or the developer of the
software project in question might be able to find similar components in
function yet under the other licenses to easily replace the GPL-licensed
one. However, if the GPL-licensed component communicates with the other
components through a static link, or it represents a core function of
the whole software project, such GPL-licensed component hence becomes
highly correlated with the entire software project and can not be easily
replaced in any case. Accordingly, separating such GPL-licensed
component would cause a chain reaction and affect the entire software
project. In other words, the other components of such software project
will be considered as derivative works of the GPL-licensed component,
and the entire software project will fall within the expansive scope of
the License Inheritance of the GPL.

#### Validity {#sec_validitytaiwan2}

To find the answer about how the copyleft principle can be sustained and
held valid under Taiwan’s legal system, three questions should be
fundamentally guided. The first question is, whether author of the
original work can validly make an arrangement for how the derivative
works need to be distributed. Second, if affirmative, how to explain the
copyleft principle on a copyright analysis, namely, can the
interpretation of copyleft be sustained in form at law? Third, can the
enforcement of copyleft be validated at law without falling into the
dispute of right abusing, and therefore be held valid substantively?

About the first question, it could be well explained according to
article 28 of the Copyright Act, which is, an author of the original
work has the exclusive right to create a derivative work, or compile
into a compilation of the original one. Therefore, if a software
component is not developed from scratch but rewritten from or derived
from other person’s preexisting work, the original author’s consent
needs to be acquired before such later developer may perform certain
modifications or adaptations on the preexisting work. Similar clauses
can be found in section 101 of title 17 of the United States Code *“A
derivative work is a work based upon one or more preexisting works.”* 
So, the original author does have the right to determine which person
can and which person can not perform the modifications and adaptations
onto its original computer program. Moreover, take the “Principle of
Freedom of Contract” into consideration, the original author hereby is
entitled to lay down the utilization of the derivative work for a
particular use, or link certain conditions onto it.

It turns out the author does have the right to make certain arrangements
to the derivative works based on its exclusive right on modifications
and adaptations of the original work as a trade off between it and the
recipients. Such copyleft content in a FOSS license agreement seems to
be sort of terms of interchange, but how we define that in the legal
system of Taiwan? Can it be determined in nature and found the right
place at law to fit in? Here comes the second question and its answer,
according to article 99, paragraph 2 of the Civil Code the copyleft
principle could be deemed as a resolutory condition adhered to the
contract because when the violation of it has been reached, the license
granting contract between the original author and the recipients shall
cease to be in existence. Take GPL-3.0 for example, it declares such a
statement in the termination section as *“You may not propagate or
modify a covered work except as expressly provided under this License.
Any attempt otherwise to propagate or modify it is void, and will
automatically terminate your rights under this License.”*  Therefore,
copyleft principle could be treated and sustained as a resolutory
condition at law in form, it will not be activated by the time when the
recipients just receive the FOSS project, however if the recipients do
make modifications or perform certain adaptations on the FOSS project
and distribute the derivative works in a wrong way which is forbidden by
the FOSS license. In that case, this disobedience to the copyleft
principle will fulfilled this resolutory condition and hence terminated
the contract between both parties. After that, the legitimate status for
the recipients to continuously perform the modifications, adaptations,
or distributions on the original work and derivative works has been
breached or revoked. In view of that, the author of the original work
can therefore initiate the complaint or litigation to the recipients for
the copyright infringements.

Based on the above legal deduction, copyleft principle stipulated in the
FOSS licenses could be supported at law as a resolutory condition
provided by the Civil Code in Taiwan. To be precisely specified, a FOSS
license agreement can be deemed to be a “bilateral contract with
resolutory conditions”[^1214]. However, according to the legal
principles, there is no rights entitled at law can be abused by the
holders in any extreme ways, this is also fairly elaborated in article
148 of the Civil Code in Taiwan as *“A right can not be exercised for
the main purpose of violating public interests or damaging the others,
and it shall be exercised and a duty shall be performed in accordance
with the means of good faith as well.”*  Judging from these criteria
upon copyleft principle in the FOSS licenses, could it be likely to be
deemed as rights abusing in a way or not? As a matter of fact, there is
no any solid legal inference has been concluded on that. Even so, most
critics in Taiwan think that except for the worst situation might be
found on a case by case basis, the copyleft principle is basically
having nothing to do with the right abusing. Take the currently most
applied FOSS licenses with copyleft principle for example, such as
GPL-2.0, GPL-3.0, LGPL-2.1, LGPL-3.0, MPL-2.0, EPL-1.0, and AGPL-3.0,
the extensive scope regulated by copyleft principle in them is still
fundamentally limited to the typical area of the derivative work defined
by the copyright law or other related software acts. In the MPL-2.0 and
EPL-1.0, the regulated scope has even been restrained to the file-based
or module-based boundaries. Although in the GPL-3.0 and AGPL-3.0, the
drafters take the term “work based on” to replace “derivative work” in
the previous license versions, it still shows that the extensive scope
based on copyleft principle is limited to some extent. On account of
that, the third question about whether the enforcement of copyleft
principle can be validated at law or not in the substantive point of
view, the answer should be positive. Moreover, sometimes authors do
choose a FOSS license with copyleft principle for certain reasons, one
might hence be able to set forth its dual-licensing business model with
a copyleft FOSS license and a proprietary software license on the same
software project at the same time, or one might therefore make a
confirmation that the software released can continue its free
circulation and be brought back to its own utilization one day in
exactly the same way as it was given away at the beginning. As a whole,
judging from the fact that the copyleft principle might be chosen by an
author with discretion for its own lawful copyright management, and
under most circumstances it will also not be deemed as exceeding beyond
the protection of public interests. Therefore it should be sustained and
held valid at law in Taiwan, either in form or in substantive evaluation
aspect.

### Damages {#sec_damagestaiwan}

As set forth previously, some articles of Copyright Act in Taiwan are
deemed as special provisions to the general Criminal Code. Therefore,
when a copyright infringement has been made on purpose, it is the
prosecutor who can initiate the prosecution upon complaint and suggests
the imposition of fine, detention, or imprisonment onto the intentional
violator. Considering that an intentional or malicious copyright
infringement could already be punished by criminal measures, there is
actually no punitive damages to double or triple amount could be claimed
under the Copyright Act. And this rule is applied to computer programs
as well as other copyright works. According to article 88 of the
copyright Act, a person who unlawfully infringes other person’s economic
rights out of intention or negligence shall be liable for damages. With
regard to the damages, the injured party may make claim in any of the
two manners provided in article 88, paragraph 3 of the Copyright Act at
its choice. The first option is to request the submission from the
infringer about the amount of benefit obtained on account of this
infringing activity. Basically the damages will be equal or close to the
obtained benefit, which is the revenue derived from the infringement
deducting the costs and other necessary expenses. However, if the
infringer is unable to establish the details for the costs and related
expenses, then the obtained benefit in question should be deemed as the
total revenue derived from the infringement.

The second option to calculate the damages is in accordance with the
general applicable principles of the unlawful act, provided in article
216 of the Civil Code. Abiding by that, the damages shall be the injury
suffered and the interests lost to the injured party owing to the
infringement. However, if the injured party is unable to prove damages
in detail, an analogy calculating alternative can hereby intervene.
According to article 88, paragraph 3, subparagraph 1 of the Copyright
Act, the injured party may base the damages on the differences between
the amount of expected benefit from the exercise of such rights under
normal circumstances and the amount of benefit from the exercise of the
same rights after the infringement. This analogy license claim is quite
useful and practical for an author in need of claiming its compensation
on the infringement of a FOSS project. Although there are certain doable
and flexible business models could be performed for benefit earning on
the FOSS projects such as service providing, product value-adding,
dual-licensing way and so on, quite a number of the FOSS projects are
still basically provided on a copyright royalty-free or even patent
royalty-free basis. By making the analogy license claim, the injured
party can therefore save the situation if the calculation to the injury
suffered and interests lost are proven to be too complicated or
time-consuming in reality. Or, if it is still difficult for the injured
party to prove actual damages in accordance with the two solutions
provided above, the injured party may request the court directly set
compensation at an amount of not less than ten thousand and not more
than one million New Taiwan Dollars based on the seriousness of the
matter. If the damaging activity was intentional and / or serious, the
compensation set by the court may be increased to five million New
Taiwan Dollars maximum.

FOSS cases in Taiwan {#sec_casestaiwan}
--------------------

By the time the Taiwan chapter finished, there is still no FOSS cases
have been reported (July 2013). However, if it comes to the “Freeware”
project lawsuits, as in similar general public licensing way, “Chinese
Chess v.1.0 Software” case might be a fine reference. This verdict has
been ruled by the Taipei District Court of criminal case number 2055 in
1998 as its first instance of court, and by the Taiwan High Court of
criminal case number 5401 in the same year as its second instance of
court. The author of Chinese Chess v.1.0 is Sheniun Wu. Mr. Wu once
uploaded the Chinese Chess v.1.0 developed by him to the educational
TANet of National Tsing Hua University in Taiwan. He distributed it
under a simple license condition as “being free for everyone to
redistribute the program with limitation of no more than the physical
cost of the redistribution can be charged.” After a period of time, the
program has been included into a CD medium by the computer program
vendors, and hence been sold together with the CD copies for commercial
profits. When Mr. Wu realized the situation, he submitted a legal
complaint to the authority, and therefore this case has been brought to
court by prosecutor. Due to the software in question is fundamentally a
Freeware, none of the copyright assignment and the copyleft principle
topics have been discussed by courts at all. However, either the court
of first instance or the court of second instance ruled the contract
binding and relation between the software author and the software
recipients are perfectly established by the general public licensing
way, and should be held valid according to article 161 of the Civil Code
when the notice of acceptance in a contract is predeclared to be
fulfilled by action similar to a tangible reply. This standpoint by
courts should be sustained thereafter in FOSS cases as well, because the
“taking/downloading without additional notice of acceptance” mechanism
is fairly applied to them without a difference to Freewares.

United Kingdom {#chap.uk}
==============

author:\[Katz,Andrew\] author:\[Mitchell QC,Iain G.\]

Introduction to software protection under United Kingdom law {#sec_introduction_uk}
------------------------------------------------------------

### Body of law {#sec_bodyuk}

Unlike the other countries covered in this book, the United Kingdom
comprises not one but three separate jurisdictions: England & Wales,
Northern Ireland and Scotland. Each jurisdiction has its own legal
system, with its own *corpus* of laws, both common law and statutory.
This is particularly true of the Law of Scotland[^1215]. In some areas,
the laws of Scotland and of England can be substantially different. By
contrast the laws of England and of Northern Ireland share a common
heritage, and are substantially similar, though some minor differences
can occur.[^1216]

The modern law of Intellectual Property in each of these jurisdictions
has developed since the Act of Union in 1707 and is almost entirely
based upon statutes of the United Kingdom Parliament commencing with the
foundation of the concept of copyright, the post-Union Statute of Anne
1709[^1217]. The legislation has tended to cover the whole of the United
Kingdom with only minor differences to accommodate the different Court
structures, and has been interpreted uniformly by judges in all
jurisdictions. Thus, it becomes possible to treat this area from a
United Kingdom perspective. In this chapter, the phrase “United Kingdom
Law” is used to mean English Law, Northern Irish Law and Scots Law taken
together, and differences amongst English Law, Scots Law and Northern
Irish Law are noted where appropriate.

In the United Kingdom, then, copyright protection of software (as with
all forms of copyright protection) is regulated under the Copyright,
Designs and Patents Act 1988[^1218] (referred to as the “Copyright
Act”), as updated and amended from time to time. In particular, the
Copyright (Computer Programs) Regulations 1992[^1219] implemented the
Council Directive of 14 May 1991 on the Legal Protection of computer
programs (91/250/EEC)[^1220] into United Kingdom law (referred to as the
“Software Directive”).

### Copyright Act: Object of protection {#sec_uk_object}

Computer programs (including the preparatory material) are protected by
copyright and are equivalent to literary works within the meaning of the
Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works. This
protection is transposed into the law of the United Kingdom by virtue of
section 3(1)(b) of the Copyright Act. The same criteria apply to the
copyright protection of computer software as applied to literary works.
Thus, only original computer programs benefit from copyright protection.
This means that the computer program needs to be an intellectual
creation of its author, or, if the program is a computer-generated work
itself[^1221], the person who made the arrangements necessary for the
creation of the work[^1222].

In terms of section 1 of the Act, copyright is a right of property. It
is incorporeal in nature and therefore copyright falls to be regarded as
(according to the terminology of Scots Law and most European systems)
incorporeal moveable property, and, (according to the terminology of
English law and Northern Irish Law) incorporeal personal property.

### Authors/Copyright owners {#sec_uk_authors}

The Copyright Act provides that the copyrights in a work belong to the
author, unless the author is an employee who created the work “in the
course of his employment” in which case it belongs to the employer,
unless there is an agreement to the contrary[^1223]. There is a
significant body of case law determining the meaning of "in the course
of his employment" and "employer" in the context of employment and tax
law cases, and it is assumed that these cases would be followed in a
copyright law context. An important effect of this is that the default
ownership position, where an entity engages a contractor to create
software (in other words, where the contractor is not an employee of the
entity, but engaged under a contract for services), is that the
copyright in the software will remain with the contractor. Thus unless
the contract for services sets out explicitly that the ownership in the
software shall be assigned to the entity engaging the contractor’s
services, the entity will not obtain the copyright in the software, and
will, instead, obtain some form of implied licence, the scope of which
is unclear.[^1224]

### Exclusive rights {#sec_uk_Exclusiverights}

According to section 2(1) of the Copyright Act the owner of copyright
(including copyright in computer programs) has the exclusive economic
rights set out in Chapter II of the Copyright Act (see section 16(1)).
These are (following the sub-paragraph designations in the Act) the
right :

\(a) to copy the work;

\(b) to issue copies of the work to the public;

\(c) to rent or lend the work to the public;

\(d) to perform, show or play the work in public;

\(e) to communicate the work to the public;

\(f) to make an adaptation of the work or to do any of the above in
relation to an adaptation.

All these rights theoretically apply in the case of a computer program,
even if that seems counter-intuitive. For example by virtue of section
19(2), “performance” would include any mode of visual presentation. It
can be argued that this includes running a program that presents an
output on the screen. Equally, this could be covered by 20(2)(b) which
includes "the making available to the public of the work by electronic
transmission that members of the public may access it from a place and
at a time individually chosen by them"[^1225]

Section 18(1) deals with exhaustion of distribution rights: the
restricted act of issuing copies to the public only applies in relation
to copies put into circulation in the EEA which have previously not been
put into circulation by or with the consent of the copyright owner, or
the act of putting into circulation outside the EEA copies not
previously put into circulation in the EEA or elsewhere.

It is not clear under UK law whether “copies” in this context refers
only to physical copies, or whether it can also include electronic
copies.

Translation of a computer program into another “language or code” (which
would presumably include compilation and assembly) is explicitly
expressed to be making an adaptation (section 21(4)).

### Exceptions to exclusive rights {#sec_uk_ExceptionstoExclusiveRights}

Lawful users of computer programs are guaranteed the following rights
(which are neither an infringement of copyright, nor a breach of any
term of a contract purporting to restrict them[^1226])

\(a) The making of backup copies (to the extent they are necessary)

\(b) decompilation; and

\(c) observing, studying and testing

(see further below)

\(1) In the absence of specific contractual provisions, no authorization
by the rightholder is required for acts necessary for the use (including
copying or adapting[^1227]) of the computer program by the lawful
acquirer or for error correction[^1228].

\(2) A lawful user of a computer program may not be prevented from making
any backup copy, insofar as that copy is necessary to use the
program[^1229].

\(3) A lawful user of a copy of a computer program is entitled, without
the authorization of the rightholder, to observe, study or test the
functioning of the program in order to determine the ideas and
principles which underlie any element of the program if he does so while
performing any of the acts of loading, displaying, running, transmitting
or storing the program which he is entitled to do[^1230]. This right may
not be excluded by contract.

The decompilation right in the Act[^1231] essentially echoes Article 6
of the Directive. It may not be excluded by contract, but is subject to
conditions. The decompilation must be necessary to obtain information
necessary to create an interoperable program, and that information may
only used for that purpose. If the lawful user already has ready access
to relevant information, then the decompilation is not permitted. The
information must not be used to create a program which substantially
similar in expression to the program decompiled.

This is of relevance to open source when an attempt is made to write
open source code which is intended to interoperate with proprietary
software. There is an argument that by creating an interoperable program
for which the source code is available, the coder will be in breach of
the obligation to keep the information confidential.

The exercise of these statutory rights is often difficult in practice
because their scope is unclear.

### Moral rights {#sec_uk_Moralrights}

Software is not subject to moral rights under United Kingdom law (and
neither are computer generated works)[^1232].

### Term of protection {#sec_uk_Termofprotection}

The same term as for works of literature and art applies: 70 years as
from the 1st January in the year following the death of the
author[^1233]. However, if the work is computer generated, copyright
expires at the end of the period 50 years from the end of the calendar
year in which the work was made. In practice, although the object code
created by a compiler is a computer generated work, since it is also an
adaptation of a literary work (the original source code), the licence of
the rightholder in the source code would still be required for the
duration of the copyright in the underlying source code, even if the
copyright in the object code *qua* computer generated work had
expired[^1234].

Where the authors are joint, the reference to the death of an author
should be construed as the death of the last remaining author[^1235].

### Copyright assignment and assignation {#_copyright_assignment_and_assignation}

As we have seen, in the absence of any agreement to the contrary, any
copyright work created by an employee for an employer in the course of
the employee’s employment is automatically owned by the employer,
without any additional formality.[^1236] However, because there may be
circumstances where it is not clear when the employee is acting within
the course of his employment (for example, at home, in his own time, or
on a project other than the one he was employed to work on) it is not
unusual for employment contracts governed by the laws of the UK
jurisdictions to contain clauses which are intended to clarify
ownership. It is important to stress that when an employee creates a
work in the course of his employment, this is not regarded as the
employee being the original author of the work but somehow assigning the
copyright to his employer, but, rather as being the employer who is the
author in the first place, even although the instrumentality by which
the work comes into existence is through the work of the employee.

In all cases where copyright belongs to one person or entity and is
sought to be transferred to another, to effect that transfer there
requires to be a written assignment or assignation, signed by the rights
holder.[^1237] However, no special form of words is required, nor is any
special formality of execution or deed (such as a probative, or
self-proving deed, though, of course such formal execution, though
unusual, would not be excluded). Similarly, and whatever the experience
in certain European jurisdictions may be, notaries are never used. Like
any other business document, all that is needed is a simple document in
writing, however informally expressed, and merely signed by the granter.
[^1238] Some commentators have suggested that a contract (or deed) is a
necessary formality for an assignment to be enforceable (e.g. PLC).
Howewer, the different requirements of Scots law regarding unilateral
obligation make it less likely that a contract or formal deed would be
necessary in the case of an assignation, since under the Law of
Scotland, only such a written assignation will be effective to effect
the transfer of the copyright, but, under English Law, the court can,
through the application of trust principles, recognise that in certain
circumstances the beneficial ownership of copyright may pass in the
absence of a written assignment, whilst the legal interest in the
copyright remains with the original rightsholder. In itself, the legal
interest in copyright has no value if it is severed from the beneficial
interest (although the owner of the legal interest can pass good title
to a third party who acquires that title for value without notice of the
beneficial claim). The detailed ramifications of the severability of the
legal and beneficial interests are beyond the scope of this work.

For clarity, it is always advisable to ensure that assignments or
assignations are in writing and signed by the rightsholder, and, under
English and Northern Irish law at least, are subject to consideration
(even if it is a nominal £1), or are made by deed. No consideration is
required under Scots law.

It is possible to make partial assignment of a work: any of the
exclusive rights granted to the copyright owner can be assigned
separately. It is also possible to assign some or all of these rights
for a limited period of time[^1239]. Section 36(2)(b) of the predecessor
legislation, the Copyright Act 1956, expressly permitted the assignment
of rights in other countries in which the copyright holder had such
rights. No such specific provision appears in the current Copyright Act,
but it is not to doubted that such an assignment or assignation would be
effective in respect of those rights.

It is also possible to assign prospective copyright in a future, but
currently non-existent work, such that when the work comes into
existence, the assignment or assignation will automatically take
effect[^1240].

The assignment or assignation of software is treated exactly like the
assignment or assignation of all other literary works.

In addition to assignment or assignation, ownership of copyright can
also be transmitted by testamentary disposition (i.e. by will) or by
operation of law[^1241] “Operation of law” may be, for example,
succession according to the rules of intestate succession, or passing to
an administrator, receiver or liquidator of a company or a trustee in
bankruptcy. Although the principle of such transmission is common to all
three jurisdictions, the actual outworking of that principle will differ
according to the laws of succession, the insolvency laws and other
relevant laws of each jurisdiction. In relation to the examples given,
there is a substantial commonality amongst the jurisdictions in the laws
of corporate insolvency (which are regulated by UK statute though with
some differences to accommodate the legal systems and procedures of the
different jurisdictions), not much commonality (at least between Scots
Law and the law of the other jurisdictions) in the laws of personal
insolvency, and virtually no similarity at all in the laws of
succession. It is beyond the scope of the present work to discuss these
matters.

### Technical devices and effective technological measures {#sec_uk_TechnicalDevices}

A "technical device" is any device intended to prevent or restrict acts
that are not authorised by the copyright owner of that work and are
restricted by copyright[^1242]. The definition is used in relation to
computer programs. The Copyright Act has a similar definition for
"technological measures", which apply to copyright works other than a
computer program[^1243]. Computer programs and other copyright works are
treated slightly differently in this regard (note that the bundle of
files containing what would colloquially be described as a computer
program may consist of files which are computer programs within the
legal sense — the executables, for example, and also files such as
documentation or content which would be considered as other copyright
works).

Where a technical device has been applied to a computer program, a
person who manufactures, imports or distributes, supplies, offers or
advertises to supply or has in his possession for commercial purposes
any means the sole intended purpose of which is to facilitate the
unauthorised removal or circumvention of the technical device, or
publishes information which is intended to assist people in
circumventing it, then that person is liable for a copyright
infringement claim from any of (a) the distributor of the software; (b)
the exclusive licensee; or (c) the owner or exclusive licensee of the
technical device.[^1244]

Similarly, where effective technological measures have been applied to a
copyright work which is not a computer program, if a person circumvents
those measures knowing, or having reasonable grounds to know that he is
circumventing them, then the owner or exclusive licensee of the
underlying copyright work has the same rights as against the person
circumventing as if he were an infringer of the copyright in that
work[^1245]. There is an exception for people undertaking cryptographic
research, so long as the rights of the underlying copyright owner are
not prejudiced[^1246]. A person unlawfully removing or altering
“electronic rights management information” is similarly liable[^1247].
Likewise, if a device or service for circumvention of a technological
measure is manufactured, supplied etc., then the copyright owner,
exclusive licensee and owner of the effective technological measure have
similar rights against the manufacturer, supplier etc[^1248].

### Enforcement measures {#sec_uk_Enforcement}

The Copyright Act contains provisions intended to assist in the
enforcement of copyrights.

There are several criminal offences relating to Copyright. In summary,
these are:

-   making an infringing work for sale or hire;

-   importing an infringing work into the UK (other than for the
    importer’s private or domestic use);

-   possessing in the course of a business an infringing copy with a
    view to committing any act infringing the copyright;

-   selling, hiring, offering to sell or hire, exhibiting in public or
    distributing an infringing copy in the course of a business.

It will be noted that the above offences are all connected with
commercial activities. In each case, an infringing copy is a copy which
infringes copyright, and which the defendant[^1249] knows or has reason
to believe infringes copyright[^1250].

There is an offence, intended to criminalise uploading, which applies
where a person, otherwise than in the course of a business, distributes
an infringing copy to such an extent as to affect prejudicially the
owner of the copyright[^1251].

There is a further offence of making or possessing an article designed
or adapted to make copies of a particular copyright work, where the
defendant knows or has reason to believe that it may be used to make
infringing copies for sale or hire in the course of a business[^1252].

It is quite difficult to bring a prosecution under this latter
provision, as the article in question must be making the copies, and its
copying capability must be designed or adapted to make copies of a
particular work. Photocopiers, for example, would not come within this
definition.

It is an offence to communicate an infringing copy to the public in the
course of a business, or where the interests of the copyright owner are
prejudiced, where the defendant knows or has reason to believe that the
communication infringes copyright[^1253]. This offence is intended to
cover streaming. Operators of content linking sites may also find
themselves liable for conspiracy to defraud (R. v. Vickerman, 2012).

Although it may be assumed that Parliament intended the scope of
Criminal Offences to be exhaustively set out in the Copyright Act (note,
for example, that there is no offence related to non-commercial
downloading of copyright materials), a zealous private prosecutor has
succeeded in a successful prosecution for conspiracy to defraud.[^1254]

More recently, in implementation of WIPO Treaty Obligations and EU
Directives, secondary legislation introduced the idea of “technical
devices” (which apply to computer programs) and “technological measures”
(which apply to copyright works other than computer programs) (see
above). It is an offence to manufacture for sale or hire, supply or
advertise commercially, possess or distribute commercially (or
distribute non-commercially if this prejudicially affects the rights of
the copyright owner) anything which is primarily intended for enabling
or facilitating circumvention[^1255]. However, there are no criminal
offences associated with the unauthorised removal of technical devices.

The law also provides a number of remedies to copyright owners,
exclusive licensees, and in certain cases people authorised by those
rights holders, to facilitate the delivery up and/or seizure of
infringing materials[^1256].

HM Revenue and Customs also has certain duties in relation to the
impounding and seizure of goods which are imported into the United
Kingdom and which infringe certain intellectual property rights. They
have confirmed informally that a copyright holder of firmware contained
in embedded devices may potentially invoke these powers where the
firmware has been released under the GPL, but the relevant conditions of
the GPL are not being complied with[^1257].

Unprotected software, public domain software and orphan works {#sec_uk_unprotected}
-------------------------------------------------------------

Only software that is original in the sense that it is an intellectual
creation of the author benefits from copyright protection. Non-original
software does not come into consideration for copyright protection and
can, in principle, be used freely.

The level of originality required in the United Kingdom is relatively
low. Originality does not equate to novelty (as in patent law): it is
theoretically possible for two identical works to be created
independently and for copyright in each to vest in their respective
authors simultaneously.

In the United Kingdom, copyright arises automatically by operation of
law upon the creation or first publication of a work. No form of
registration is required, or even possible. The author has copyright in
his work, whether he wants it or not. The work will not and cannot enter
the public domain prior to the expiry of the relevant copyright term.
However, this does not mean to say that there could not be devised a
mechanism which might produce an effect similar to the work being in the
public domain. For example, under English Law, it is likely that an
unrestricted, irrevocable licence, expressed as a deed poll for the
benefit of all third parties, coupled with a promise not to sue for
infringement would be provide an equivalent to a dedication to the
public domain. In Scots Law a similar mechanism could be used, though
without the need for a deed poll.[^1258]

Another option available in English Law would be to license the software
as part of a contract, explicitly extending the licence irrevocably to
all third parties. This licence would be enforceable by such third
parties pursuant to the Contracts (Right of Third Parties) Act 1999. In
this case, it is arguable that by virtue of the doctrine of promissory
estoppel, if the copyright owner promised not to pursue copyright
claims, even under a bare licence, and reliant on that promise, someone
made use of the software in such a way as would be detrimental to them
if the right was removed, the original copyright owner would be unable
to terminate the licence.

The approach in Scotland would require to be rather different. Again, a
licence could be granted by the copyright holder to another individual
irrevocably extending the licence to all third parties. This would be
recognised at common law in Scotland as conferring upon the third
parties a *ius quaesitum tertio* enabling them to rely upon the terms of
the licence. Scots Law does not require there to be consideration before
there can be a contract, so there would be no need to invoke principles
of personal bar.[^1259] However, since a simple unilateral promise would
be effective in Scots Law, there seems little point in venturing into
the additional complications of bilateral contracts with a *ius
quaesitum tertio*.

However, such schemes would produce only an analogue of releasing the
work into the public domain: it would not in fact do so. There might
always be the risk of other legal principles intervening — for example,
if the copyright holder were to become insolvent, might his trustee in
bankruptcy (or, if an entity, its liquidator) seek to renounce or reduce
the contract under the relevant legislation, no consideration having
been paid for the licence? Or, if an individual, might there be an
attempt (say by the author’s disappointed heirs) to have the contract
reduced on the grounds that the deceased author was *incapax* when he
granted it? These might seem like fanciful questions, but the point is
merely to illustrate that a renunciation of copyright and release into
the public domain is just not legally possible in the United Kingdom.

The concept of “orphan works” has recently been introduced into UK
copyright law (section 116A Copyright Designs and Patents Act 1988), but
the relevant provisions are not due to come into force until October
2014. They do not directly implement the Orphan Works Directive
(2012/28/EU) and there is currently some debate about the interaction
between the two systems.

The copyright law of the United Kingdom draws no distinction between
FOSS and proprietary software. All such software is protected by
copyright, and the copyright owners have the exclusive rights over the
software. Third party use is lawful only if it takes place outside the
scope of copyright (after expiry of the relevant term, for example) as
an exception to the copyright, or under a licence of the software. Such
licence may be a bare licence, or a contractual licence. Use outside the
scope of a licence (or otherwise permitted by law) will amount to a
breach of copyright.

Analysis of FOSS under United Kingdom law {#sec_uk_analysis}
-----------------------------------------

In essence, a licence is a permission to do something which would
otherwise be unlawful; namely in the present instance, to copy. Such
permission is rarely given without qualification: conditions are almost
always attached. This is particularly the case in FOSS Licences, which
may have attached to them conditions requiring software freedom, though
the precise conditions vary from one type of FOSS Licence to the next.

Under English Law, proprietary licences are almost exclusively
contractual. Thus the licensor, as one contracting party undertakes to
authorise the licensee to undertake a number of acts which would
otherwise be unlawful under copyright law, in exchange for which the
licensee makes several contractual promises, such as a promise to pay a
licence fee or a promise not to use the software for certain purposes
(for domestic purposes only, for example, if the software is licensed on
a “home and student” basis).

In contrast, there exists in English Law the concept of a “bare licence”
which is a mere permission to do what would otherwise be unlawful, and
which may be subject to conditions (or other constraints, such as to
duration). If the conditions are fulfilled, the licensee is granted the
authorisations required under the Copyright Act, and his use is not
unlawful. If the licensee performs acts reserved to the licensor outside
the scope of the conditions, those acts will be copyright infringement.
There are no obligations on the licensee under a bare licence: an act of
the licensee either infringes copyright (because it falls outside the
scope of the licence or the licensee has not fulfilled the conditions)
or it does not. The licensor of a bare licence is not contractually
obliged to maintain the licence, and may therefore withdraw the licence
on notice to the licensee. However, by analogy with real property law,
it is arguable under English Law that once a licensee has relied on the
grant of a bare licence to his detriment, the licensee can invoke the
principle of promissory estoppel[^1260] to restrain the licensor from
withdrawing the licence.

Free and open source software licences are generally characterised under
English Law as bare licences. This has consequences which are considered
below.

A Scots law analysis may, however, be somewhat different. It is a
feature of bare licences under English Law that the licensee will have
given no consideration for the grant of the Licence. Since, under
English Law, for there to be a contract there requires to be
consideration, that would give obvious problems in relation to analysing
such licences in contractual terms, necessitating the development of the
concept of a bare licence. By contrast, under Scots Law, there is no
requirement for consideration for there to be a contract and this
enables a rather more straightforward analysis.

A licence is essentially a surrender by the copyright owner of his right
to prevent copying, but it is only a conditional surrender. If the
conditions are not observed by the licensee, then the permission does
not apply and the copying is unlawful. A Scots Law analysis would regard
all licences as being, in one sense, contractual (since it makes no
difference whether there is a consideration or not), but given that the
effect of the contract is a conditional surrender of the proprietor’s
rights, this may have important consequences, as more particularly
discussed below.

There may, however, be an analogous problem to at least one of the
problems presented in English Law by bare licences: where no duration is
stated for the contract, the court might find the contract unenforceable
due to lack of consensus on a material term (the duration). However,
since the court will always seek to avoid such a result where possible,
it is more likely that it would seek to construe the contact so as to
find an implied term as to duration. Just what term the court would find
would depend on the individual circumstances of each licence and may
require evidence as to the surrounding facts and circumstances of the
making of that licence as between the parties, or it might hear evidence
as to what is the normal industry practice, or, it might, as with an
English bare licence, treat the contract as being determinable by the
will of the proprietor. However, the Court would, at the least, imply a
term permitting termination on reasonable notice. In the case of FOSS
licences the Court may be reluctant to imply a term that the contract is
terminable at will (on whatever notice), as explained below.

### Copyrights {#sec_uk_Copyrights}

Although FOSS can be written by one person or be owned by one legal
entity (as a result of contributor assignments, for example), generally
speaking, after some time software developed along FOSS principles will
become the work of several authors, who are copyright holders, each of
whom can make claims to it.

Where the contributions are severable (and the development process of
the software may be able to assist with determining this, by examining
the history of the code’s development in the repository) then the
portions will be owned separately. If, however, the contributions of the
authors are not severable (for example where two coders are working on
the same piece of code simultaneously, for example through the
development methodology called “extreme coding”), then they will be
joint owners of the code.

Joint ownership has an effect on copyright term: the basis date for
calculating copyright term will be the last of the joint owners to die.
The consent of all joint owners is required to license the code (which
means that any individual joint owner wishing to use the code must
obtain a license from all other joint owners, and any one joint owner
may be subject to copyright infringement proceedings from the other
joint owners). The only way this form of joint ownership may arise is
through co-creation.

A second type of joint ownership may arise in England through the
formation of a trust. In this case the two types of joint ownership are
regarded under English Law as tenancy in common and joint tenancy. These
forms of ownership do not depend on co-creation, and may be created by
agreement, or assignment of copyright to joint owners in one of these
forms. In brief, tenants in common can agree that they own certain
proportion of the rights (e.g. 40/60). Joint tenants cannot, and it is
not correct to describe them as owners of a share of the copyright in
any meaningful sense. In both cases, the consent of all co-owners will
be required for exploitation, as with the non-trust form of joint
ownership. The details of trust law are beyond the scope of this
chapter.

The position in Scotland, though having a broad similarity is quite
different in important details. Joint ownership in Scotland takes the
form of either common property or joint property. Common property is
where property is owned by the parties in separate *pro indiviso* shares
in the whole in such proportions as they may have agreed (for example,
50-50 or 60-40). Each share is legally, though not physically separate,
and each proprietor may burden or alienate his own share (whether by,
for example, assignation or testamentary bequest). In Joint property,
there is a single indivisible ownership of the whole, and such burdening
or alienation by one of the proprietors is not possible. Under modern
conditions, common property is the norm and Joint property is restricted
to ownership by a body of trustees[^1261] or the members of an
unincorporated association.

Of course, an assignation of a (say) one third *pro indiviso* share in
the copyright of a program is not likely to be regarded in the market
place as a particularly marketable commodity, so the practical outcome
is as it is in England, namely, that for commercial exploitation, the
consent of all the common owners is likely to be necessary, though the
necessity is largely practical. In the case of Joint Property, properly
so called, however, the necessity will also be legal.

As a general rule, since joint owners are only ever able to exploit the
copyright with the agreement of the other joint owners, it is wise to
document the rights that each joint owner has in a formal licence
agreement, granting a licence from the joint owners to each joint owner
individually. In this way, a general right to grant sub-licences, to
exploit, create adaptations and so-on may be explicitly granted. If the
co-owners intend that the software is released under an open source
licence, then that licence itself may grant sufficient rights to each
co-owner individually.

Under English and Scots law, it is not clear what happens to the
copyright ownership of code which contains severable contributions in
source code, which are then more closely intertwined in the object code.
However it is submitted that not a great deal turns on this in practice.

In practice, and given the immensely long period of copyright subsisting
in computer software, for code released under an open source licence,
there are few practical differences between the different forms of
co-ownership in open source.

By contributing to a pre-existing work by creating new modules or
modifying or amending it, subsequent authors are creating a derivative
work[^1262] of the underlying work, and therefore, the licence of the
original author will be required both to amend it and to subsequently
exploit it (open source licences will grant these rights).

Any co-owner will have standing to take proceedings against infringers,
whether third parties, or another co-owner who is infringing.

It is not clear under English and Scots law how damages would be
assessed for infringement of FOSS, including where the damages relate to
a claim brought by one co-owner.

### The assignment of copyrights {#sec_uk_Theassignment}

In order to control the copyright situation better (to facilitate
re-licensing, for example), it may be useful to collect all copyrights
concerning a FOSS project within one organisation. The existence of this
organisation will simplify the management and enforcing of the joint
rights. The collective management of copyrights is perfectly possible
under English and Scots law, and is usually, but not necessarily,
facilitated by an assignment or assignation of the copyrights. As we
have seen above, copyrights can be assigned at law only in writing, in a
document signed by the assignor.

### Moral rights {#sec_uk_moremoralrights}

FOSS originated in the United States, and therefore attaches less
importance to the moral rights of the author. The Open Source Definition
specifies that the author of software distributed under a FOSS license
cannot oppose the use of the software by certain people and
groups[^1263] or for certain areas of application[^1264].

Computer programs *per se* do not attract moral rights[^1265]. However,
related materials, to the extent that they are still literary works, may
attract protection by way of moral rights (if they are created by
independent contractors or other individuals who are not employees).
Most obviously, this may include operation manuals.

Moral rights in the UK are less absolute than in many other European
jurisdictions. All moral rights are potentially capable of waiver by the
content creator (both before and after creation of any specific work),
and copyright assignments and employment contracts frequently contain
general waivers.

### Enforcing FOSS licenses {#sec_uk_EnforcingFOSS}

In one sense, it is meaningless to talk about FOSS licences being
“enforceable”.

Under English law, FOSS licences are best understood as bare licences,
and as such may provide a defence to a claim of copyright infringement,
but, under English Law, no one is able to commence a claim under the
FOSS licence itself. However this point has not been judicially
determined in the United Kingdom[^1266].

Under Scots Law, however, there is no obvious impediment to the owner of
the copyright seeking to bring proceedings against a licensee for breach
of the conditions under which the licence was granted. That action might
seek either the statutory remedies available for copyright infringement
(the conditions having been breached, the act of copying is no longer
permitted) or it might seek the contractual remedies stipulated in the
licence, since all licences (including what in English Law would be
regarded as a mere “bare licence”) are, equally, contractual. Further,
because of the nature of the obligations of the Licensee as conditions
attached to the grant of the permission, the right to enforce those
conditions will go with the ownership of the copyright. It follows
therefore that the copyright may be assigned to another without the need
for a separate assignation of the supposed “right” to enforce the
copyright.[^1267]

Another way of looking at the issue (and, it may be, from the English
Law perspective) a better question is whether a FOSS licence can provide
an effective defence against a claim of infringement. This point has
also not been judicially determined in the United Kingdom, but it is
difficult to construct an argument as to why such a licence would not
act as an effective defence, except possibly that, as a bare licence
granted under English Law, it may be withdrawn on notice by the
copyright owner. However, the doctrine of promissory estoppel (discussed
above) provides a mechanism to restrict this right of withdrawal where
the licensee has relied on the licence.

Although a Scottish Court could similarly rely on the analogous concept
of Personal Bar to restrict the exercise of the right of a proprietor to
withdraw the Licence where that has been relied upon to his detriment by
a Licensee, it is more likely that the Scottish Court would effectively
deal with the matter at the stage of determining whether the copyright
proprietor’s permission can indeed be withdrawn at will. As explained
above, the Court would set itself the task of seeing whether the
contract (for such is even what English Law regards as a bare licence)
contains an implied term as to duration. In the case of FOSS licences,
it would consider the architecture and structure of the licences
(particularly their cascade nature, the accretion of rights as the
program is developed, and the automatic downstream licensing provisions)
and, it is submitted, have little difficulty in coming to the view that
there is an implied term that the license duration is perpetual, and
that the licence cannot be terminated by the proprietor at will.

#### Parties to the licences {#_parties_to_the_licences}

If one author makes his work available under a FOSS license, the answer
is clear: the licence is granted by the author to the licensee. In case
of different co-authors, it becomes more complicated. If the licensors
are co-owners of severable parts of the work, then there will be a
sequence of licences in place between those co-owners and the licensee.

In most cases FOSS will be the work of several authors who did not work
in joint consultation. FOSS is usually realised via a tree of authors
who all contributed to the version of the program. In so far as a new
author makes an original contribution to the work, a derivative work is
produced. The licensee of the eventual work will need to have the
consent of every author in the chain who made an original contribution
to the eventual work, starting with the author of the first work. This
consent can be by a direct licence (as with the GPL, where the licensee
is expressed to receive a direct licence from all previous licensors of
the work), or indirectly by giving consent in the FOSS license to the
next author to modify and distribute the work (essentially a
sub-licence).

Several FOSS licenses solve this by explicitly confirming that the
licensee will receive a licence from all prior authors in the tree. GPL
version 3, for instance, contains the following clause: “Each time you
convey a covered work, the recipient automatically receives a license
from the original licensors, to run, modify and propagate that work,
subject to this License[^1268]

#### Validity of the FOSS licence as a contract {#_validity_of_the_foss_licence_as_a_contract}

An author chooses a FOSS license because he wants to distribute his work
and make it available to others — possibly with certain restrictions.
For him it is important that he can enforce these restrictions.

Conventional commercial licence agreements are reached by the explicit
acceptance of the terms and conditions by the licensee following the
signing of the terms and conditions, by opening the packaging, by
clicking or selecting an “I agree” button or by any other action from
which acceptance can be inferred. These methods to reach a licensing
agreement have been sufficiently tried and tested and, at least between
commercial parties, are generally considered to be valid.

Many FOSS licences are drafted in such a way that there is no obligation
on the licensee: merely a set of conditions with which the licensee must
comply in order to benefit from the protection of the licence. English
law requires that for an contract to be validly formed, there must be an
intention to create legal relations, an offer and an acceptance of that
offer, and mutuality of obligations on both parties. If the licensee is
operating within the scope of the conditions, then he obtains the
protection of the licence. If he is operating outside their scope, then
he is potentially liable to a copyright infringement claim. There is no
obligation for him to act in accordance with the condition: but
consequences are likely to flow if he fails to do so.

Where it is ambiguous whether a term could be interpreted as a condition
or an obligation, then it is argued, that by analogy with the principle
that where contract terms are to be implied, they should be implied to
the minimum extent possible to give business efficacy to the agreement,
that a contract itself should not be implied unless such an implication
is necessary to give business efficacy to the relationship. In many
cases, it will not be necessary.

It is an open question as to whether the approach adopted by the
Scottish Courts might differ. As noted above, Scots Law does not require
consideration for there to be a contract. If the copyright owner
undertakes to grant a licence on certain conditions and a licensee then,
in effect, avails himself of the permission, it is at least arguable
that his so availing himself of the permission amounts to an acceptance
of the offer which falls to be inferred *rebus et factis* and there is
thus a contract which does create obligations upon the licensee.

In any event, FOSS licenses which are concluded in accordance with the
contractual mechanism and comply with the characteristics required by
English Law (or which, in Scots Law terms discloses that a contractual
consensus has been reached) will have been validly formed and
enforceable as contracts. However, from the English perspective, owing
to the lack of mutuality of obligations, it is arguable that many of
them will be regarded by an English court as bare licences as opposed to
contracts. As explained, this is unlikely to become an issue if the
licence falls to be interpreted under Scots Law.

Typically, in a FOSS environment, however, software is made available
with the simple specification on a website or in the source code of the
software that it concerns FOSS. The license usually does not need to be
explicitly accepted. Having to click and confirm every time could in
some cases interfere with the use of the software. The Open Source
Definition opposes demanding explicit agreement with the licence
conditions with the aim of confirming the agreement between licensor and
licensee[^1269].

The question is whether in these cases a valid licence is granted. In
other words, as we have seen before, is a user of the software under a
FOSS licence within the scope of its terms able to defend a claim of
copyright infringement from the licensor? Using the software without the
author’s consent implies a copyright infringement. There is no reason to
believe that the FOSS licence does not grant effective consent
(although, as stated above, this is subject to a possible right of
withdrawal on notice). Since there is no implication (that cannot be
rebutted by the application of an explicit licence) that software made
available on the internet has been dedicated to the public domain (to
the extent that such dedication is at all possible), or is made
available under some sort of liberal implied licence, this has the
consequence that everyone who wants to use software which they find via
the internet, needs actively to look for a licence.

Since the FOSS licence is the only means by which authorisation to use
the software is granted, and failing that authorisation, the use will
almost invariably be a breach of copyright, there is little value in a
user trying to dispute the existence or validity of the licence under
either English or Scots Law.

#### Violation of licence terms {#_violation_of_licence_terms}

Where a user is using software subject to copyright other than in
accordance with the conditions contained in a licence, then that use
will (unless a statutory exception applies) be in breach of copyright,
and the user will be liable to a copyright claim from the copyright
owner. This is equally true if the licence is contractual. However, in
this latter case, the licensee may also be open to a claim for breach of
contract. This distinction may also affect the interpretation of the
terms of the licence, as it becomes open to the court to interpret
contract terms as conditions or warranties. If the term is a condition,
then use of the software outside its scope is both a breach of contract,
and also a breach of copyright. If the term is a warranty, then the use
of the software will not be a violation of copyright, but breach of the
warranty will open the licensee to a contractual claim.

There are several other consequences of a FOSS licence being determined
to be a contract.

A contract is amenable to specific performance: an equitable remedy,
granted at the court’s discretion, under which a party to a contract is
compelled to perform it (as opposed to paying damages for his failure to
perform). This may apply to obligations to release source code.

In addition, under English Law, as a contract, the Contracts (Rights of
Third Parties) Act 1999 will apply (in default of its explicit
exclusion). If, for example, a FOSS licence provides that the licensee
must provide all third parties with copies of source code on request,
then any third party (i.e. anyone in the world) would, under that Act,
be entitled to apply to the court for an order to enforce that
obligation as against the licensor. Similarly, under Scots Law, the
third party would probably be able to rely upon a *ius quaesitum
tertio*.

Further, under insolvency legislation, insolvency practitioners
administering the affairs of an insolvent individual or company are
granted certain powers to terminate unprofitable or onerous contracts,
which may include FOSS licences granted under contract[^1270]. Similar
provisions apply in Scotland.

### Waiver and liability {#sec_uk_Waiver}

There is, under English and Scots Law, no automatic connection between
the ownership of copyright, and liability arising from a defect in that
copyright work. Liability for a defect in that work will arise either
because of an explicit or implied contract term in a contract between
the the provider of the software (who may or may not be its owner, and
therefore the licensor) and the user. Contract terms implied by the Sale
of Goods Act 1979 (which are unlikely to apply directly to software *per
se*, but may apply to a physical good which incorporates software)
include a warranty that the item is fit for purpose and of satisfactory
quality. In a contract for the supply of services (made in the course of
a business), the term implied is that the service provider applied
reasonable care and skill in the supply of the services (Supply of Goods
and Services Act 1982). In most cases, there will be no such contract
between the supplier and the end-user where FOSS is involved, and, even
if there is, it may well be the case that such a contract is not in the
course of business.

It is theoretically possible that an author could be liable to a
licensee in tort including negligence[^1271]. However, it is generally
difficult in English and Scots law for a person to claim for
non-physical (i.e. pure economic) loss unless there is some sort of
connection between the two parties where it is reasonable for one party
to rely on the other’s knowledge and expertise.[^1272]

Typically, FOSS licenses contain strong exclusion clauses, which attempt
to discharge the author from all liability[^1273]. One reason for this
is that FOSS is often made available without a fee, as a result of which
the author generates insufficient income to pay for liability insurances
and legal costs[^1274]. Another is a simple principle of fairness in
that programmer should not be asked to accept liability for something
when she has no control over the distribution of it.

Although this reasoning is certainly valid for the amateur programmer,
it applies much less for professional programmers who built their
business model around FOSS[^1275]. Professional suppliers of FOSS or
related services often provide warranties and indemnities[^1276]. There
is no reason, in principle, why a person may not warrant the performance
of another person’s software (or indeed its title). However, care should
be taken to ensure that such a business does not become an unlawful
insurance business.

The Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 is the primary piece of legislation
governing exclusion clauses. Some exclusion clauses (such as those
limiting liability for death and/or personal injury caused by the
negligence of the person seeking to rely on them) are not capable of
exclusion under the Act (irrespective of whether or not they are
contained in a contract, although the title of the Act might suggest
otherwise). Further, outside the context of a contract, clauses which
seek to exclude liability for negligence are enforceable only to the
extent that they are reasonable. The question as to whether a notice is
reasonable or not, is ultimately a question of fact for the judge.
Bearing in mind, first, the reluctance of judges to find liability for
purely economic losses in non-contractual negligence cases, and, second,
that the software is licensed for free, it would seem unlikely that
under English or Scots law the author of FOSS would find himself liable
in negligence for mere non-performance of the software. However, where
the software was specifically provided for use where its failure might
cause death or personal injury, the exclusions of liability contained in
the licence would not apply.

Perhaps anomalously, if the FOSS licence is found to be a
contract[^1277], the Unfair Contract Terms Act applies somewhat
differently. The rule about inability to exclude liability for death and
personal injury arising from negligence remains, but the reasonableness
test in respect of other terms only applies where the licensee deals as
a consumer or on the licensor’s written standard terms of business.
Taking the latter point first: it would initially seem that a FOSS
licence would count as written standard terms. First, where the licensor
is not acting in the course of a business, then the terms may be written
and standard, but they will not be terms of business. Even if the
licensor is licensing the software in the course of his business, it may
be that the licence is not his standard terms: it has been argued, in
the context of building contracts, that where the terms are not imposed
by the contractor, but are standard terms drafted by a third party (for
example, the Royal Institute of British Architects) that they are not
the other’s written standard terms of business. This argument may well
be applicable to FOSS licences which are drafted by a third party (for
example, the various flavours of GPL). If this argument is successful,
the exclusion will be applicable if either the licensee or the licensor
is not operating as a consumer (that is, operating within the scope of a
business). The upshot of this is that even if a FOSS licence is found to
be a contract, in many of the contexts in which FOSS is employed, the
Unfair Contract Terms Act will not impinge on typical exclusion clauses
(at least to the extent that they exclude liability for loss not
relating to death or personal injury), and even if it does, then the
judge will consider whether the exclusion is reasonable, for which the
fact that there may well be no direct relationship between the licensor
and licensee, and that the software is being licensed at no cost, will
all be relevant factors.

If the FOSS licence can be construed as a contract, and the transaction
is made with a consumer, then the Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts
1999 will apply. Further analysis is not appropriate given the space
available in this chapter, but consideration of exclusions of liability
is likely to be similar to consideration under the Unfair Contract Terms
Act 1977.

The Consumer Protection Act 1987 (“CPA”) implements the directive
85/374/EEC. UK Government guidance suggests that software is a product
for the purposes of the Act, and that the producer of software may find
himself strictly liable where software finds itself into the supply
chain of a dangerous product[^1278]. However, the CPA does provide a
defence to a provider of a dangerous component where that component was
supplied free and not with a view to a profit.[^1279]

### The copyleft principle {#sec_uk_Thecopyleft}

#### Principle {#_principle_9}

A characteristic found in different (but not all[^1280]) FOSS licenses
is the so-called “copyleft” principle. FOSS licenses which incorporate
the copyleft principle[^1281], lay down the principle that everyone in
the chain of consecutive users, as a condition of the grant of the right
of use of the software, needs to distribute the improvements he makes to
the software and the derivative[^1282] works he makes under the same
conditions to other users, if he chooses to distribute such improvements
or derivative works. In other words, software which incorporates
copyleft FOSS, needs to be distributed in turn as copyleft FOSS.

The copyleft principle is restrictive. Businesses which rely on licence
revenue as an income stream will find that they cannot incorporate third
party code released under a copyleft licence into their proprietary
offering. It is also restrictive, in that with few exceptions[^1283], it
is not possible to combine software under two different copyleft
licences and then distribute them. The reason for this is that both
copyleft licences will insist on the resulting software being released
under their own terms to the exclusion of any other.

Sometimes warnings are issued for the dangers that companies run if a
negligent or vindictive employee were to incorporate a piece of copyleft
code in the code of proprietary software. In theory this could mean that
the company would be obliged to make its proprietary software available
under a copyleft FOSS license. Under English law, the court’s powers to
compel the release of the source code would be contained in the
equitable order of specific performance. Only if the relevant FOSS
licence amounted to a contract would this remedy be effective, and even
then, the remedy would be at the discretion of the court.

Under Scots Law, the risk for the infringing company would be higher. In
the first place, there is a greater likelihood that a FOSS licence would
be regarded as contractual, and, second, the Scottish remedy of specific
implement will generally be granted, the court’s discretion to refuse it
being limited to cases where to grant the remedy would give rise to
exceptional hardship, where the obligation is for the payment of money,
where the contract, if specific implement were granted would result in
the creation of an intimate relationship[^1284], where compliance would
be impossible[^1285] and where the court cannot enforce the
decree[^1286]. In those cases where specific performance or specific
implement was not granted, it is likely that there would be the grant of
an injunction, or, in Scotland, an interdict to prevent distribution of
the infringing code, coupled with a damages claim. The infringing
company, if it were not prepared to comply with the terms of the FOSS
licence, would therefore have to release its software without the
infringing FOSS code, either at a cost of impaired functionality, or
alternatively by obtaining or writing code with similar functionality
from elsewhere.

### Damages {#sec_uk_Damages}

Damage caused by copyright violations are compensated for under English
and Scots law by the applying one of two measures of damages, as
selected by the copyright owner. These are either an account of profits
(in Scotland, an action of accounting for profits) or damages
representing the loss in value to the copyright owner of the underlying
work.

The difficulty with seeking an account of profits or accounting for
profits can be in determining what proportion of the profits of any
infringing sale are capable of allocation to the specific piece of
copyright owned by the claimant. However, where an infringer takes a
piece of software (FOSS or otherwise) where the claimant is the owner,
and sells it a profit in violation of the owner’s rights, the claimant
is entitled to the profits so derived.

So far as diminution of value of the underlying work is concerned, it
can be difficult for a court to determine that there is a loss in
economic value, especially where the work in question is made available
free of charge. This is where dual licensing can assist the claimant: if
the software is also made available under a proprietary licence for
which a fee is charged, then the court may be persuaded that this is the
appropriate fee on which to base damages for infringement[^1287].

Statutory damages such as dual or triple damages are not available under
English or Scots law. However, under English law, punitive and exemplary
damages may be awarded in extreme cases, but such awards are rare. Under
Scots Law there is no concept of punitive or exemplary damages and under
no circumstances are damages anything other than compensatory. The
general rule in litigation in England is that “costs follow the event”
and in Scotland that expenses follow success: in other words, the party
which prevails is likely to be awarded its costs (in Scotland, its
expenses). However, costs or expenses are at the discretion of the
judge, who may, nonetheless award costs or expenses against a prevailing
party for many reasons, including poor conduct of the case, the
prevailing party winning on a technicality in a case which should never
have been brought, and so on. Even where a party is awarded costs or
expenses, recovery is rarely 100% of the costs expended, as costs and
expenses are limited to what is known as “judicial expenses”, which is
to say only such expenses as it is considered proper to be recovered
against an unsuccessful party, and only in a sum which is considered
reasonable. This is established in a process called “taxation”. In
England, costs are typically reduced to around 60% of the costs actually
expended. In Scotland, the amount of the reduction in expenses is more
difficult to predict, but there will almost always be a reduction which
can be substantial.

FOSS cases in the United Kingdom {#sec_uk_cases}
--------------------------------

There have not yet been any reported cases (June 2014).

Legal procedures {#sec_uk_procedures}
----------------

Stephen Mason kindly reviewed this section from a litigator’s
perspective.

### England {#sec_uk_England}

FOSS-related cases in England will typically be copyright infringement
cases, and will be heard in the civil courts. Simple cases may be heard
in the county court, but cases with special legal significance, or of
higher worth, will be heard in the High Court. Cases are decided by a
single judge: jury trials are extremely rare in civil cases in England.

A case will typically commence with the claimant’s lawyer sending a
letter before action setting out the claim. Many types of claim in
England will render the claimant at risk of costs if a strict pre-action
protocol (or default practice direction) is not followed. There is
currently no pre-action protocol for intellectual property cases so the
default rules apply. A claimant will always be at risk of a costs claim
unless care is taken to give the defendant an opportunity to settle the
case. The English courts regard themselves as the dispute resolution
mechanism of last resort, and failure a party to show evidence of
adequate attempts to resolve the dispute by alternative means may render
it liable to costs.

A claimant may apply for an injunction to restrain infringement of
intellectual property rights, and there is no reason why this should not
in theory apply to an infringement of a FOSS licence. However,
injunctions are not granted as of right, and are always at the
discretion of the judge. In an emergency, an injunction may be claimed
ex parte meaning that the claimant applies without giving notice to the
defendant. The courts are reluctant to grant such an extreme remedy, and
will require the claimant to demonstrate the necessity of such a remedy,
as well as giving an undertaking to bring the matter to trial, and pay
the defendant’s costs if the injunction proves to be unfounded. An
interim injunction may be granted on notice, where the defendant is
given an opportunity to set out its case prior to a full trial.

As well as demonstrating clean hands (that the claimant has not itself
committed some wrongdoing), the claimant will have to establish that
damages are an inadequate remedy (in FOSS cases, where a licence fee is
not paid for use of the software, the claimant could put this argument
particularly strongly, saying that its intention in making the software
available was never to make money, but to require those redistributing
derivative works of it (in the case of copyleft software) to make those
derivative works available under a similar licence. The court will also
apply a balance of convenience test to determine whether the grant of an
injunction pending the trial will, on balance, benefit the claimant more
that it harms the defendant[^1288].

A useful additional remedy is the forfeiture of infringing articles.
Furthermore, if, there is perceived to be a risk that evidence may be
destroyed (for example hard discs scrubbed) then a useful weapon is,
again on an *ex parte* application, the granting of a search order for
the seizure and securing of evidence[^1289]. The English civil law
system is adversarial as opposed to inquisitorial, and the judge decides
on the basis of the arguments put by the parties' lawyers (usually, in
court cases, barristers). However, the English High Court possesses a
division called the Technology and Construction Court where the Judges
are somewhat more experienced in technology matters than other divisions
of the High Court, and are accordingly more likely to take it on
themselves to take on a minor inquisitorial role. It is by no means
automatic that a FOSS case will be heard by the Technology and
Construction Court, and in fact, this division is better regarded as
being the appropriate one for handling projects-type cases with multiple
parties, rather than two-party intellectual property claims.

We have seen already that the English litigation system operates a
costs-follow-the-event mechanism, but that costs are in the gift of the
judge who decides on the basis of the conduct of the parties, and are
subject to the process assessment called taxation.

Aggrieved parties are able to appeal from the High Court to the Court of
Appeal, in cases where the Judge has erred on a matter of law, and from
there there is a right of appeal on a question of law to the Supreme
Court (formerly the House of Lords), although leave has to be granted
either by the Court of Appeal or, on an application, by the Supreme
Court itself. In cases involving questions of EU Law it is open for the
High Court or the Court of Appeal to refer the question to the European
Court of Justice, though such a reference is not mandatory. However, a
reference from the Supreme Court in such a case would be mandatory.

### Scotland {#sec_uk_Scotland}

Cases in Scotland relating to FOSS may be likely to be seeking either
remedies for copyright infringement or remedies available under the
Licence. Such cases do not involve any question of criminal law, and
will be brought in the civil courts. Under the Scottish Court structure,
the country is divided into a number of Sheriffdoms and each Sheriffdom
will, typically, have a number of courts within it — one in every large
town and some, indeed, even in very small communities in remoter parts
of the country. The Sheriff has both a civil and a criminal jurisdiction
but, of course, a licensing dispute will be heard by him under the civil
Ordinary Cause rules. There is no upper financial limit on the cases
which can be heard in the Sheriff Court, nor is there any filter to
reserve more difficult cases to higher courts. In the result, in the
areas with which this Chapter is concerned, the Sheriff Court’s
Jurisdiction is, effectively, co-existensive with that of the Court of
Session.

The Court of Session is the supreme civil Court in Scotland[^1290] and
is divided into the Outer House (the equivalent of the High Court in
England) which hears cases at first instance, and the Inner House (the
equivalent of the Court of Appeal in England) which hears Appeals from
both the Outer House and the Sheriff Court. The standard form of
litigation in the Outer House is by way of an Ordinary Action[^1291]
though there is also available a special Intellectual Property Action
procedure and a special Commercial Action procedure. Because a case
concerns intellectual property and might competently be heard under the
intellectual property procedure, does not compel it to be so heard. The
pursuer might opt to raise the action as an ordinary action, or, if the
case is commercial in nature, might (but is not compelled to) raise it
as a commercial action.

There are both Intellectual Property Judges and Commercial judges, but
neither of these types of specialist judges are allocated only cases in
the areas in which they specialise. There is a heavy demand on judicial
time in Scotland, and all of the Senators of the College of
Justice[^1292] are liable to find themselves doing anything. Thus,
intellectual property judges can find themselves hearing, say, road
accident or medical negligence cases, or divorces, or cases about the
more arcane areas of wills and succession or revenue law. Because of the
collegiate nature of the Court of Session, an intellectual property
judge might find himself in an emergency called upon to sit in the Inner
House. Further, although the High Court of Justiciary (the supreme
criminal Court in Scotland) is an entirely separate court with its own
history and procedures, and its own judges (Lords of Justiciary) the
judges of the High Court of Justiciary are the same people as the judges
of the Court of Session, only wearing different robes and occupying a
different office. Accordingly, the Intellectual Property judges are
quite likely to find that they spend some of their time hearing criminal
trials in Glasgow High Court. A similar position potentially arises in
the case of Commercial judges, but there is an expectation that they
will be largely relieved of duties other than sitting as a commercial
judge. There is no such expectation in the case of Intellectual Property
judges. As a result, it may happen that an intellectual property judge
will not be available to hear an intellectual property case, but the
rules allow any other judge to hear intellectual property cases.

In addition, a few, but by no means all Sheriff Courts also have a
commercial action procedure modelled on the commercial procedure in the
Court of Session.

Therefore, a pursuer who is contemplating raising an action relating to
FOSS may competently be able to do so as a Sheriff Court Ordinary
action, a Sheriff Court Commercial action, a Court of Session Ordinary
action, a Court of Session Commercial action, or a Court of Session
Intellectual Property action.

Commercial actions and Intellectual Property actions are subject to more
proactive case management by the Court than are Ordinary actions and
every effort is made to ensure that one judge is allocated to deal with
the whole of the case (with Ordinary actions, cases are dealt with by
whichever judge happens to be free at the time). Commercial actions are
subject to a strict pre-action protocol involving the need for
solicitors to send letters before action and to discuss the dispute and,
if nothing else, at least narrow the issues. Theoretically, failure to
go through the pre-action protocol may result in a penalty in expenses,
though this does not always occur. It is also theoretically possible for
the court to dismiss the action for failure to give effect to the
pre-action protocol, but this seldom happens. There is no mandatory
pre-action protocol in either Intellectual Property actions or Ordinary
actions. Unlike England, the Scottish Courts do not tend to see
themselves as the dispute resolution mechanism of last resort, and
(certainly in Intellectual Property and Ordinary actions) there is no
compulsitor for a party to attempt to resolve the dispute by alternative
means.

Civil jury trials do not exist in the Sheriff Court and, in the Court of
Session, are available only for reparation and defamation cases.
Accordingly, any dispute relating to FOSS will be heard by a judge
sitting alone, though, in the case of the Intellectual Property
procedure, there is the possibility of the judge sitting with an expert
assessor.

A pursuer may apply for an interdict to restrain a wrong, for example
the infringement of intellectual property rights or of contractual
rights. If he can demonstrate that there is sufficient urgency he can
obtain an *interim* interdict before service of the Summons (i.e.
without notifying the defender in advance, unless the defender has
lodged a *caveat*); but, of course, he has no automatic entitlement to
the grant of an *interim* interdict — he has to demonstrate that one is
required on the balance of convenience. Even if an interim interdict is
obtained, the defender might always enrol a motion for a recall of the
interdict, and the court will then hear both sides on what is usually a
fuller argument. Just where the balance of convenience lies is very much
a matter for the judge in the whole circumstances of the case.

These remedies will apply in a FOSS case as they would in any other
case.

A useful additional remedy available in Scotland as it is in England, is
the forfeiture of infringing articles. Furthermore, if, there is
perceived to be a risk that evidence may be destroyed (for example hard
disks scrubbed) then a useful weapon is, again on an *ex parte*
application before service of the Summons, the appointment by the Court
of a Commissioner (usually a Senior Counsel) to conduct a “dawn raid” to
seize and secure evidence.

The Scottish civil law system shares with the English system the
characteristic of being adversarial as opposed to inquisitorial, and the
judge decides the case on the basis of the arguments put by the parties'
lawyers. If the case is being conducted in the Court of Session, this
will usually be an Advocate[^1293] though may also be a
Solicitor-Advocate[^1294] and if the case is being conducted in the
Sheriff Court, may be an Advocate but is rather more likely to be a
Solicitor.

As noted above, expenses (which, however are subject to taxation) will
usually follow success, though this may not always be the outcome,
depending on the view which the judge may take of perceived special
factors.

Aggrieved parties may appeal from the Sheriff to the Sheriff Principal
of the Sheriffdom in which the case was heard, and from the Sheriff
Principal to the Inner House of the Court of Session. The Appeal to the
Sheriff Principal is optional, and an aggrieved party can elect to
appeal instead from the Sheriff direct to the Inner House. If the case
was heard in the Outer House of the Court of Session, then the Appeal
lies to the Inner House. From there, there is a right of appeal to the
Supreme Court (formerly the House of Lords). The right of appeal is
absolute and no leave is required either from the Inner House or the
Supreme Court, though the Appellant does require to obtain a certificate
signed by two counsel certifying that there are stateable grounds of
Appeal. In cases involving questions of EU Law it is open for the
Sheriff Court or the Outer or Inner Houses of the Court of Session to
refer the question to the European Court of Justice, though such a
reference is not mandatory. However, a reference from the Supreme Court
in such a case would be mandatory.

### Recommended literature {#_recommended_literature_7}

-   Law and the Internet Third edition, ed. Edwards and Waelde, Hart
    Publishing Oxford 2009, esp. Chapter 11, Andres Guadamuz

-   A Manager’s Guide to IT Law, second edition, British Computer
    Society, 2011

-   Stephen Mason, general editor, Electronic Evidence (3rd edition,
    LexisNexis Butterworths, 2012)

United States of America {#chap.usa}
========================

author:\[Webbink,Mark H.\]

Introduction to software protection under United States law {#sec_introductionusa}
-----------------------------------------------------------

### Body of law {#sec_bodyusa}

Rights in software in the United States arise from a mixture of federal
and state law and the interpretation of those laws by the various
courts. Software may be protected by a combination of copyright, patent,
trademark, and trade secret law. Further, the licensing of rights in
software is subject to contract law, bankruptcy law, antitrust
(competition) law, uniform state laws, tax law, export control law, and
other specialized federal and state statues.

Copyright and patent protection of software arises under Section 8,
Article 1 of the U.S. Constitution.[^1295] The Copyright Act is embodied
in Title 17 of the U.S. Code, the statutes that implement the
Constitutional directive.[^1296] The Patent Act is embodied in Title 35
of the U.S. Code.[^1297] Both copyright and patent law fall within the
exclusive jurisdiction of the U.S. Federal government.

To the extent the publisher of software claims a trademark applicable to
that software, such trademark rights may arise under federal trademark
law, state trademark law, or common law rights in trademarks. Federal
trademark law is embodied in the Lanham Act, Title 15, Chapter 22 of the
U.S. Code.[^1298] State trademark law is generally embodied in state
statutes of the various states. In the U.S. rights in a trademark may
arise under common law from mere usage.

Software may also be protected by trade secret law. Trade secrets are
most commonly protected under a uniform state law (that is, a law that
has been adopted in substantially the same form among a large number of
states) like the Uniform Trade Secrets Act.[^1299] There is a federal
statute on trade secrets, as well, but it is less commonly relied upon
for contractual protection of software.[^1300]

Of the remaining areas of law that may govern a software license, none
is more important than contract law. Contract law in the U.S. is largely
within the purview of state law, and U.S. courts give contracting
parties a great deal of deference in determining the contractual terms
that will govern their relationship. As a consequence, parties may,
within limits, contract away rights and/or protections otherwise granted
under copyright, patent, trademark or trade secret law.

### Copyright protection of software {#sec_protectionusa}

Software is protected by copyright and is equivalent to literary works
within the meaning of the Berne Convention for the Protection of
Literary and Artistic Works as established by the World Intellectual
Property Treaty of 1996.[^1301] Software was recommended for formal
inclusion under copyright in the U.S. in the final report of the
National Commission on New Technological Uses of Copyrighted Works
(CONTU)[^1302], the recommendations of which were incorporated in the
Copyright Act of 1976.[^1303] Inclusion of software under copyright was
further clarified with amendments to the Copyright Act adopted in 1980
that defined a computer program as “… a set of statements or
instructions to be used directly or indirectly in a computer in order to
bring about a certain result” and by limiting the rights in computer
programs to assure the right of a lawful possessor to make a back-up or
archival copy of the program.[^1304]

It is important to note that in the U.S. copyright protection of
software extends to each of the source code and binary versions of the
software. While copyright in software arises automatically when it is
“… created and fixed in a tangible form that it is perceptible either
directly or with the aid of a machine or device”[^1305], enforcement of
copyright in the U.S. requires registration of the copyright with the
U.S. Copyright Office.[^1306]

### Authors/Beneficiaries {#sec_authorsusa}

Section 102 of the U.S. Copyright Act (the “Act”) provides copyright
protection for “original works of authorship fixed in any tangible
medium of expression.”[^1307] Nothing more is required. Thus, whatever
ownership interests exist in the copyright commences with the reduction
of the expression to some tangible medium, whether paper or an
electronic file.

#### The sole developer {#_the_sole_developer}

Section 201(a) of the Act provides that copyright protection in a work
“vests initially in the author or authors of the work.”[^1308] In the
case of a sole developer, copyright in the software code will vest with
her as the sole owner upon fixation of the code in a tangible medium of
expression. That is, once she types and saves the code, fixing it in the
computer’s memory, she now owns the copyright in that code. Nothing more
is required of the developer to own the copyright.

#### Works for hire {#_works_for_hire}

In the case of a developer writing software code within the scope of her
employment, the resulting work is known as a “work made for hire.” With
a work made for hire, “the employer or other person for whom the work
was prepared is considered the author for purposes of \[the Act\],” and
the owner of the copyright in the work.[^1309] The developer and her
employer may agree otherwise, where ownership remains with the
developer, through an express agreement in a written instrument signed
by both parties.[^1310] The intention of the developer and her employer,
expressed before the code is written, will dictate who owns the
copyright in the resulting work.

The result changes where the software developer is not an employee.
Software is not a form of copyrightable material that statutorily falls
under the list of special order or commissioned works within the scope
of works made for hire unless it constitutes a commissioned contribution
to a collective work.[^1311] Thus, the transfer of ownership of software
produced outside of the scope of employment must be supported by express
contractual language in writing.[^1312]

#### Joint ownership {#_joint_ownership}

Section 201(a) of the Act further provides that “\[t\]he authors of a
joint work are co-owners of copyright in the work.”[^1313] Joint
authorship in a work arises when “a work is prepared by two or more
authors *with the intention that their contribution be merged into
inseparable and interdependent parts of a unitary whole* \[emphasis
added\].”[^1314] The hallmark of joint authorship is the authors' “joint
laboring in furtherance of a preconcerted common design.”[^1315] That
is, each contributor must intend for their contributions to be merged;
however, it is not necessary that the contributors “work in physical
propinquity, or in concert, nor that the respective contributions made
by each joint author must be equal in quantity or quality.”[^1316]
Furthermore, it is not necessary that the contributors expressly agree,
in writing, to create a joint work.[^1317]

The touchstone of joint authorship is the intention of the joint authors
that their contributions be merged at, or before, the moment in time
when the contribution of each joint author is created.[^1318] That is,
two developers, who intend that the code they contribute to a project be
merged into inseparable and interdependent parts of a unitary whole must
express that intent before development commences, and each will own an
equal and “undivided ownership in the entire work.”[^1319]

So long as the intent to create a joint work exists prior to the
commencement of work, it is even possible for joint authorship to occur
“even though the joint authors do not work together in their common
design, do not make their respective contributions during the same
period, and indeed even if they are complete strangers to each
other.”[^1320] This situation is common among developers working
independently in developing software modules that are to be included in
a unified open-source project. The intent and timing of these developers
will dictate who owns the copyright in the resulting work.

The joint authors are the co-owners of a single copyright in the joint
work.[^1321] However, joint authorship is not the only means by which
joint ownership of a work may arise.

> A joint work will result under any one of the following circumstances:
> (1) if the work is a product of joint authorship; (2) if the author or
> copyright proprietor transfers such copyright to more than one person;
> (3) if the author or copyright proprietor transfers an undivided
> interest in such copyright to one or more persons, reserving to
> himself an undivided interest; (4) if upon the death of the author or
> copyright proprietor, such copyright passes by will or intestacy to
> more than one person; (5) if the renewal rights under the Copyright
> Act or the terminated rights under the termination of transfers
> provisions, vest in a class consisting of more than one person; (6) if
> the work is subject to state community property laws.
>
> —  1-6 Nimmer §6.01.

Each co-owner of a joint work “obtains an undivided ownership in the
whole of the joint work, including any portion thereof.”[^1322] In other
words, each co-owner may use or license the work, without the consent of
other co-owners, in any way she may wish.[^1323] Co-owners of a
copyright do, however, owe to each other a duty to account for any
income derived from their use or license of the work.[^1324]

#### The derivative work {#_the_derivative_work}

The Act also protects derivative works and compilations.[^1325] A
derivative work is a work based in whole, or in substantial part, upon a
pre-existing work that recasts, transforms, or adapts the underlying
work in some way.[^1326] For copyright protection to extend to a
derivative work, “the additional matter injected in a prior work, or the
manner of rearranging or otherwise transforming a prior work, must
constitute more than a minimal contribution.”[^1327] Since most new
works are influenced, in some way, by a pre-existing work, there exists
a fine line between a derivative work and an entirely new work.[^1328]
If a developer uses very little of a pre-existing work, taking only code
not protected by copyright (like a basic function), or if she uses the
pre-existing code in such a way that the resulting program is
substantially different from the original, the new creation is simply a
new, original work of authorship and not a derivative work.[^1329]

Ownership of a separate copyright in a derivative work not only requires
more than a minimal contribution to the prior work, but also permission
from the owner or owners of the copyright in the prior work. Even with
such permission, the creator of the derivative work will own the
copyright in only that portion of the derivative work he contributed and
not in any portion of the pre-existing work upon which the derivative
work is based.[^1330]

#### Compilations and collective works {#_compilations_and_collective_works}

Finally, the Act protects interests in compilations, including
collective works.[^1331] A compilation is “a work formed by the
collection and assembling of preexisting materials or of data that are
selected, coordinated, or arranged in such a way that the resulting work
as a whole constitutes an original work of authorship.”[^1332] The
preexisting materials or data incorporated in a compilation may or may
not, on their own, be capable of being protected by copyright.[^1333]
For example, a program created by stringing together a set of basic
functions (which in themselves are not protected by copyright) may
receive copyright protection in the selection, coordination, and
arrangement of such basic functions.

Those compilations that do, however, incorporate preexisting material
capable of receiving copyright protection are known as collective
works.[^1334] The Act defines a collective work as “a work, such as a
periodical issue, anthology, or encyclopedia, in which a number of
contributions, constituting separate and independent works in
themselves, are assembled into a collective whole.”[^1335] For example,
a program that includes preexisting modules (which in themselves are
protected by copyright) may receive copyright protection in the
selection, coordination, and arrangement of the modules.

As with derivative works, for copyright protection to extend to a
compilation or collective work, “the additional matter injected in a
prior work, or the manner of rearranging or otherwise transforming a
prior work, must constitute more than a minimal contribution.”[^1336] In
the case of a collective work, the copyright in the prior work and
copyright in the collective work as a whole are separate and distinct;
the author of the prior work retains copyright ownership in her work,
while ownership of the collective work, including contributions made by
the author of the collective work, vests in the author of the collective
work.[^1337]

#### Joint works vs. derivative works vs. compilations {#_joint_works_vs_derivative_works_vs_compilations}

Joint works of authorship share similarities with derivative works and
compilations and, but for the intention of the authors, could be seen as
one and the same.[^1338] Depending on the intent at the time of
creation, one author’s recasting, transforming, or adapting of another
author’s preexisting work may create either a derivative work or a joint
work consisting of inseparable parts.[^1339] Similarly, depending on the
intent at the time of creation the assembling of the works of several
different authors into a collective whole may create either a
compilation or a joint work consisting of interdependent parts.[^1340]
Which case applies in each instance “lies in the intent of each
contributing author at the time his contribution is written.”[^1341] If,
at the time of creation, the author intends his contribution and those
contributions of others “be merged into inseparable or interdependent
parts of a unitary whole” then such a merger creates a joint
work.[^1342] On the other hand, if the intention to merge occurs only
after creation of the work, then such a merger results in a derivative
work or a compilation.[^1343]

### Exclusive rights {#sec_exclusiveusa}

The right holder’s exclusive rights to do or to authorize are set out in
Sec. 106 of the Act.[^1344] The author of software has the exclusive
right to reproduce the copyrighted work, to prepare derivative works
based on the copyrighted work, and to distribute copies of the
copyrighted work to the public by sale or other transfer or ownership,
or by rental, lease, or lending.[^1345] The exclusive right to
distribute only pertains to the original public distribution of a work
and does not extend to a subsequent distribution by a party holding
legal rights in a copy of the work.[^1346] However, a party receiving a
copy under such subsequent distribution remains bound by any contractual
limitations to which the original recipient agreed.[^1347]

### Exceptions to exclusive rights {#sec_exceptionsusa}

#### Functionality exception to copyright protection {#_functionality_exception_to_copyright_protection}

When developing computer programs it is inevitable that some of the code
will be functional in nature. As stated earlier, the Act awards
copyright protection to creative expression. “Functional elements and
elements taken from the public domain do not qualify for copyright
protection.”[^1348] Therefore, there is no striking similarity even
between two identical works so as to warrant an inference of copying to
the extent that, albeit copyrightable, functional considerations can
account for the identity.[^1349] What makes an element “functional?”
Elements are functional if they are necessary to the program and do not
exhibit any creativity. Aspects of a program’s structure which are
dictated by the nature of other programs with which they were designed
to interact are functional in nature and, thus, not protected by
copyright.[^1350]

Functional elements may also be dictated by the nature of the program
being developed. In *Computer Associates*, “the district court found
that the overlap exhibited between the list of services required for
both ADAPTER and OSCAR 3.5 was determined by the demands of the
operating system and of the applications program to which it was to be
linked through ADAPTER or OSCAR.”[^1351] These aspects of the program’s
structure are therefore functional in nature and not copyrightable.

For example, graphical user interfaces \[GUI’s\] generated by computer
programs are partly artistic and partly functional. They are a tool to
facilitate communication between the user and the computer. GUIs do
graphically what a character-based interface, which requires a user to
type in alphanumeric commands, does manually.[^1352]

In Lotus the court held that the Lotus menu command hierarchy is an
uncopyrightable method of operation.[^1353]

> The Lotus menu command hierarchy provides the means by which users
> control and operate Lotus 1-2-3. If users wish to copy material, for
> example, they use the Copy command. If users wish to print material,
> they use the Print command. Users must use the command terms to tell
> the computer what to do. Without the menu command hierarchy, users
> would not be able to access and control, or indeed make use of, Lotus
> 1-2-3’s functional capabilities.
>
> —  Id. at 815.

The menu command hierarchy in Lotus 1-2-3 is functional by nature of the
program and therefore not copyrightable.[^1354]

Other areas to consider when determining whether an element is purely or
primarily functional include:

1.  hardware standards;

2.  software standards;

3.  computer manufacturer design standards;

4.  target industry practices; and

5.  computer industry programming practices.[^1355]

An extensive discussion on the functionality exception to copyright in
software and its application may be found in an order of the Court in
*Oracle America, Inc. v. Google, Inc.*[^1356]

#### Idea/Expression merger exception to copyright protection {#_idea_expression_merger_exception_to_copyright_protection}

Under the Act, in no case does copyright protection extend to any idea
regardless of the form in which it is described, explained, illustrated,
or embodied in such work.[^1357] “It is a fundamental precept of
copyright that only the expression of ideas, and not the ideas
themselves, are copyrightable.”[^1358] “Merely stating the rule,
however, does not make any easier the task of drawing the line between
where idea ends and expression begins.”[^1359]

> The line between idea and expression may be drawn with reference to
> the end sought to be achieved by the work in question. In other words,
> the purpose or function of a utilitarian work would be the work’s
> idea, and everything that is not necessary to that purpose or function
> would be part of the expression of the idea… Where there are various
> means of achieving the desired purpose, then the particular means
> chosen is not necessary to the purpose; hence, there is expression,
> not idea.
>
> —  Whelp Assoc. Inc. v. Jaslow Dental Lab

The characteristics of computer software, a utilitarian work, make the
determination of idea and expression more complicated. Competitive
forces that exist in the software marketplace lead to the problem that
multiple programmers may design identical or highly similar
works.[^1360]

> Efficiency is an industry-wide goal. Since, as we have already noted,
> there may be only a limited number of efficient implementations for
> any given program task, it is quite possible that multiple
> programmers, working independently, will design the identical method
> employed in the allegedly infringed work. Of course, if this is the
> case, there is no copyright infringement.
>
> —  Id.

The merger doctrine is as an exception to the idea-expression dichotomy
which holds that, when there are so few ways of expressing an idea, not
even the expression is protected by copyright.[^1361] When idea and
expression merge such that a given idea is inseparably tied to a
particular expression, rigorously protecting the expression would confer
a monopoly over the idea itself, in contravention of the statutory
command. To prevent such an occurrence, courts have invoked the merger
doctrine.[^1362]

In the realm of computer programs, merger issues may arise in unusual
ways. Although, there may be many ways to implement a particular idea,
efficiency concerns can make one or two choices so compelling, as to
virtually eliminate any other form of expression.[^1363]

> Computer searching and sorting algorithms provide good examples of
> this phenomenon. Any computer system that deals with significant
> quantities of data will spend much of its operating time engaged in
> sorting and searching through that data. Because the amount of time
> spent on sorting and searching operations can significantly influence
> a program’s operating speed, efficient methods of sorting are highly
> desirable. A great deal of computer science research has been devoted
> to developing methods of sorting or searching through data, and to
> analyzing the relative efficiency of various methods. As a result of
> such research, it is now recognized that some methods of sorting or
> searching are significantly more efficient than others in handling
> particular types of data, even though any of numerous methods will
> work. In such cases, the merger doctrine should be applied to deny
> protection to those elements of a program dictated purely by
> efficiency concerns.
>
> —  Id.

While the merger doctrine and the functionality exception to copyright
protection are similar, there is a slight difference which distinguishes
the two. “Under the merger doctrine, when an idea can be expressed in
only one fashion, that expression is not protected by copyright.”[^1364]
Here the focus is on the limitations of the expression of an idea which
results in the merger of that idea and its expression. In contrast,
elements are functional if they are necessary to the program and do not
exhibit any creativity.[^1365] In reference to the functionality
exception, the focus is not on the limitations on expression of an idea
resulting in merger of the two, but on aspects of a program’s structure
which are dictated by the nature of other programs with which they were
designed to interact.[^1366]

An extensive discussion on the idea/expression merger exception to
copyright in software and its application may be found in an order of
the Court in *Oracle America, Inc. v. Google, Inc.*[^1367]. One
important aspect of this holding by the Court was that Java
specifications constitute unprotectable ideas and that it is only an
implementation of a specification that constitutes protected expression.

#### Scènes à faire in software exception to copyright protection {#_scènes_à_faire_in_software_exception_to_copyright_protection}

The Act does not directly define the scènes à faire doctrine. Scènes à
faire refers to aspects of a work that are indispensable or standard
parts of the material to be copyrighted.[^1368] “The \[scènes à faire\]
doctrine is often invoked to immunize from liability similarity of
incidents or plot that necessarily follows from a common theme or
setting.”[^1369] “Judge Leon Yankwich has called such incidents scènes à
faire, i.e., scenes which must be done.”[^1370]

> As was remarked above concerning merger, this doctrine does not limit
> the subject matter of copyright; instead, it defines the contours of
> infringing conduct. Labeling certain stock elements as “scènes à
> faire” does not imply that they are uncopyrightable; it merely states
> that similarities between plaintiff’s and defendant’s works that are
> limited to hackneyed elements cannot furnish the basis for finding
> substantial similarity.
>
> —  Id.

In *Durang*, the court found that alleged similarities that follow
obviously from the unprotected idea are therefore unprotected “scènes à
faire.”[^1371] The *Durang* court held that the lower court properly
applied the scènes à faire doctrine to hold unprotectable, forms of
expression that were either stock scenes or scenes that flowed
necessarily from common unprotectable ideas.[^1372] The *Durang* court
went on to explain that common in that context means common to the works
at issue, not necessarily commonly found in other artistic works.[^1373]

Further, under the doctrine of scènes à faire, elements of an original
work are not protected if the “common idea is only capable of expression
in more or less stereotyped form.”[^1374] “Beyond mere plot incidents
applicable to works of fiction, the scènes à faire doctrine can be
invoked throughout other copyright contexts as well; from guidebooks to
infomercials to Frequently Asked Questions web pages and beyond.”[^1375]

In *Gilley’s European Tan Spa*, “\[the\] plaintiff contended that
defendants infringed plaintiff’s exclusive rights under the Copyright
Act by preparing and displaying on their web page an unauthorized
Frequently Asked Questions page that mirrors the Frequently Asked
Questions page found on plaintiff’s web page.”[^1376].

> The Gilley’s court held a business cannot copyright a Frequently Asked
> Questions page as such or copyright words or phrases commonly used to
> assemble any given Frequently Asked Questions page. The format of a
> Frequently Asked Questions page is a common idea in our society; the
> elements of a Frequently Asked Questions page (a list of questions
> beginning with common words) are stereotypical. Some additional
> similarity beyond generic formatting is necessary to establish
> infringe-ment.
>
> —  Id. at 978.

Applied to computer programs, the merger and scènes à faire doctrines
suggest that if a limited number of options exist to achieve a given
function efficiently, interoperate with another application, or run in a
given environment, copyright will not permit exclusive control over
those program elements.[^1377] Scènes à faire is distinguishable from
the merger doctrine because, the merger doctrine holds that when there
are so few ways of expressing an idea, not even the expression is
protected by copyright.[^1378] The idea and expression are in essence,
fused. In contrast, scènes à faire relates to alleged similarities that
follow obviously from the unprotected idea.[^1379] The focus in scènes à
faire is not on the merged idea and expression or the limited number of
ways to express the idea, but on the similarities between expression in
question which are a natural result of the idea being expressed.

Moreover, scènes à faire is also distinguishable from the functionality
exception to copyright protection. While scènes à faire is expression
that relates to stock scenes or elements which are necessary to the idea
such as frequently asked questions or readme files, functionality
relates to aspects of a program’s structure which are dictated by the
nature of other programs with which they were designed to
interact,[^1380] such as hardware or software standards. As software
development languages become more and more sophisticated in the
ready-made tools they provide developers and as more and more
developers, especially open source developers, reuse standard or stock
bits of code to carry out standard functions, we can expect to see the
scènes à faire doctrine applied with greater regularity in software to
deny copyright protection.

#### Public domain exception to copyright protection {#_public_domain_exception_to_copyright_protection}

Works eligible for copyright protection may nonetheless enter the public
domain, i.e., no longer enjoy that copyright protection. For example, a
work whose copyright term has expired is obviously not protected.
Similarly, a work may have entered the public domain by reason of the
failure to satisfy certain statutory formalities of the Act as it
existed prior to 1978. In addition, an author may choose to lift the
protections of copyright and voluntary place the work into the public
domain.[^1381] “Moreover, copyright protection under the Act is not
available for any work of the United States Government, but the United
States Government is not precluded from receiving and holding copyrights
transferred to it by assignment, bequest, or otherwise.”[^1382]

What is the public domain? “A work of authorship is in the public domain
if it is no longer under copyright protection, it failed to meet the
requirements for copyright protection, or the holder of the copyright
disclaimed copyright in the work.”[^1383] Works in the public domain are
free for anyone to use without permission from the former owners(s) of
the copyright.[^1384] Material found in the public domain is free for
the taking and cannot be appropriated by a single author even though it
is included in a copyrighted work.[^1385]

> An enormous amount of public domain software exists in the computer
> industry, perhaps to a much greater extent than is true of other
> fields. Nationwide computer “bulletin boards” permit users to share
> and distribute programs. In addition, computer programming texts may
> contain examples of actual code that programmers are encouraged to
> copy. Programmers often will build existing public domain software
> into their works. The courts thus must be careful to limit protection
> only to those elements of the program that represent the author’s
> original work.
>
> —  4-13 Nimmer §13.03(F)(4).

Copyright protection is automatic and vested in the author the moment it
is created and fixed in a tangible form.[^1386] Voluntarily placing a
copyrighted work in the public domain requires some manifest expression
of the author’s intent.[^1387] Consequently, anyone considering reusing
code purportedly in the public domain should be cautious about assuming
that code to be in the public domain without some express statement from
the copyright holder declaring the code to be in the public domain. An
invitation to use with nothing more may be sufficient, but combined with
a requirement of attribution suggests the author is merely granting
permission to use while retaining the copyright and its various
protections. A more definite state, such as “as the author of this work
I disclaim the copyright in the work and declare the work to be in the
public domain” would leave little doubt as to the copyright holder’s
intent. The Creative Commons Copyright-Only Dedication statement gives
some indication of the complexity of committing a work to the public
domain.[^1388]

#### Facts in software exception to copyright protection {#_facts_in_software_exception_to_copyright_protection}

> Facts, whether alone or as part of a compilation, are not original and
> therefore may not be copyrighted. A factual compilation is eligible
> for copyright if it features an original selection or arrangement of
> facts, but the copyright is limited to the particular selection or
> arrangement. In no event may copyright extend to the facts themselves.
>
> —  Feist Publ'ns Inc. v. Rural Tel. Serv. Co.

“In no case does copyright protection for an original work of authorship
extend to any … discovery, regardless of the form in which it is
described, explained, illustrated, or embodied in such work.”[^1389]
Nimmer explains that the discoverer merely finds and records.

> He may not claim that the facts are original with him, although there
> may be originality and hence, authorship in the manner of reporting,
> i.e., the expression, of the facts. As copyright may only be conferred
> upon authors, it follows that quite apart from their status as ideas,
> discoveries as facts per se may not be the subject of copyright.
>
> —  1-2 Nimmer §2.03(E).

> (The Court in *Fiest*)[^1390] noted\] the tension between two
> well-established copyright propositions, … facts are not
> copyrightable, whereas compilations of facts generally are. As the
> tool for untangling those disparate strands, the Court relied on the
> bedrock principle of copyright subsistence—that only original works of
> authorship qualify for protection. Given that facts, by themselves,
> are never copyrightable, the Court reasoned that the element of
> originality that renders a factual compilation protectable must lie in
> selection, coordination, or arrangement of facts, with the scope of
> protection concomitantly limited to that original selection,
> coordination, or arrangement. That formulation, it should be noted,
> corresponds to the scope of copyright generally for derivative or
> collective works.
>
> —  1-3 Nimmer §3.04(2)(a).

How does this relate to computer software? In *WIREdata* an owner of a
copyright attempted to hide data in its copyrighted program.[^1391]
Specifically, the copyright owner attempted to use copyright law to
“block access to data that not only are neither copyrightable nor
copyrighted, but were not created or obtained by the copyright
owner.”[^1392]

> The information at issue in \[*WIREdata*\] was collected and then was
> slotted into plaintiff’s database. Defendant did not want that
> database’s organized structure; it only wanted the raw data. That last
> consideration proved decisive in defeating plaintiff’s copyright
> infringement claim: A work that merely copies uncopyrighted material
> such as facts is wholly unoriginal and the making of such a work is
> therefore not an infringement of copyright.
>
> —  Id.

Within the framework of computer software development it will not be
unusual to find lines of code that merely make a factual statement. A
reference in a line of code to another place in the program, a table
showing equivalences, or a target name may all be merely factual
statements within the context of the software and, thus, not eligible
for copyright protection.

#### Fair use {#_fair_use}

Originally developed by the courts through case law, certain uses or
reproductions of a work protected by copyright are considered to be
fair, and thus, not an infringement of the owner’s exclusive rights
granted by copyright law.[^1393] In other words, fair use is a defense
to copyright infringement.

Section 107 of the Act contains a list of the various purposes for which
the reproduction of a particular work may be considered fair, such as
criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, and
research.[^1394] In addition, the Act sets out four factors to be
considered by a court determining whether or not a particular use is
fair:

-   the purpose and character of the use, including whether such use is
    of a commercial nature or is for nonprofit educational purposes;

-   the nature of the copyrighted work;

-   the amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to the
    copyrighted work as a whole; and

-   the effect of the use upon the potential market for or value of the
    copyrighted work.[^1395]

From a practical perspective, it is important to recognize that the fair
use doctrine is malleable — the court has wide discretion in its
application of the four factors to the particular facts of the case
before it. There are no hard and fast rules in fair use and the
difference between an infringing use and a fair use may be murky and not
easy to delineate. Using a work protected by copyright without
permission poses a substantial amount of risk. But for fair use, the
unauthorized use of a work protected by copyright is an infringement.
Unless the use falls within one of the permissible statutory uses, there
is no way to conclusively know whether the use is fair without costly
and expensive litigation.

#### Statutory limitations on copyright in software {#_statutory_limitations_on_copyright_in_software}

Sec. 117 of the Copyright Act imposes statutory limitations on the
rights of authors or holders of copyright in computer programs by
assuring the right of a lawful owner of a copy of the software to load
that software onto a computing device and to make an archival copy of
that software.[^1396] This right to use or make a temporary copy also
extends to the so-called “maintenance or repair exception,” i.e., it is
not an infringement to activate a machine for maintenance and repair
purposes and incidental to such activation run the software installed on
the machine.[^1397]

### Moral rights {#sec_moralusa}

Unlike the copyright laws of many European nations, the United States
does not generally recognize moral rights in copyrighted works. The
exception lies with works of visual arts, such as posters, maps, globes,
motion pictures, electronic publications, and applied art.[^1398] As a
consequence, the ability to assert moral rights under copyright in
computer programs would be rare.

### Term of protection {#sec_protectionusa2}

In the United States the duration of copyright in computer programs is
dependent on the nature of the authorship. Where the computer program
was written by a single author on or after January 1, 1978, the
copyright expires 70 years following the death of the author.[^1399] If
a work was created by joint authors, the 70-year period is calculated
from the date of the death of the last surviving author.[^1400] Where
the computer program was written anonymously, under a pseudonym, or as a
work made for hire, the copyright endures for a term of 95 years from
the year of its first publication, or a term of 120 years from the year
of its creation, whichever expires first. Should the author or his/her
legal successor record his/her identity with the U.S. Copyright Office
prior to the date of expiration, the copyright term is calculated under
the general rules for known authors.[^1401] As to derivative works,
compilations or collective works, there is no special rule as both the
author of the preexisting works (if any) and the author of the
derivative work, compilation or collective work hold independent
copyrights. Thus, each protection term is calculated separately under
the general rule.

### Copyright assignment {#sec_assignmentusa}

Under U.S. copyright law the ownership of a copyright may be transferred
in whole or in part by any means of conveyance or by operation of law,
and may be bequeathed by will or pass as personal property by the
applicable laws of intestate succession.[^1402] Rights in copyright are
considered bundled and may be unbundled for purposes of license or
transfer, i.e., they may be licensed or transferred outright either
individually or in their entirety.[^1403]

To be effective, any transfer of rights under copyright, whether by
license or complete assignment, must be in writing and signed by the
holder of the rights in the copyright or that holder’s authorized
agent.[^1404] Such transfers may, but are not required to be recorded
with the U.S. Copyright Office; however, a failure to record an
exclusive grant may result in a preemption of such grant by a subsequent
grant if such subsequent grant is the first to be recorded, provided the
exclusive grant is not recorded within one month of its execution (two
months if executed outside the U.S.).[^1405] Nonexclusive licenses
embodied in a writing are not subject to such preemption.[^1406]

A unique provision of U.S. copyright law pertaining to licenses and
assignments is that all such licenses and assignments, except those made
pursuant to a work for hire, are subject to revocation by the author or
the author’s estate under certain conditions.[^1407] Such revocation may
occur only during a period commencing with the end of the 35th year
following the date of the grant (or if the grant includes a right of
publication, the end of the 35th year following such publication) and
ending at the end of the 40th year following the date of the
grant.[^1408] To effect the revocation, the empowered party(ies) must
serve notice of termination on the grantee under the license or
assignment.[^1409] An important exception to such termination is that
rights in any derivative works prepared under such grant and existing
prior to the date of termination shall survive such termination, but
only in the form in which the derivative work existed at the time of
such termination.[^1410]

### Enforcement {#sec_enforcementusa}

#### Infringement {#_infringement}

Enforcement of copyright in software where infringement occurs is no
different than for other matter subject to copyright protection.
Infringement may be found where any of the exclusive rights of the
copyright holder have been undertaken without authorization.[^1411] In
order to bring a civil action for infringement the copyright holder must
record the copyright with the U.S. Copyright Office.[^1412] Registration
serves the dual purpose of establishing the earliest date for liability
for statutory damages and attorney’s fees.[^1413]

Only the exclusive holder of a right or all of the rights (whether the
original author, an assignee, or licensee) in copyright has standing to
bring a civil action for infringement.[^1414] The exclusive holder of
less than all of the rights may only claim infringement of those rights
held; it is not necessary for the exclusive holder of a right to join
the primary copyright holder.[^1415] Nonexclusive licenses have no right
to bring an action for infringement.[^1416]

Remedies available to a successful complainant may include injunctive
relief, impoundment and disposition of the infringing articles,
statutory damages or actual damages and lost profits, and costs of court
and attorney’s fees.[^1417]

Jurisdiction and venue in copyright cases only lies with the federal
courts.[^1418] This will be true even when breach of contract claims are
asserted so long as at least one claim lies solely in copyright and such
copyright claim is the primary basis of the suit.[^1419]

#### Breach of contract {#_breach_of_contract}

Apart from the right to bring an action for infringement, licensor’s of
software may also bring an action for breach of contract where the
subject matter of the breach does not relate to rights granted under
copyright. As examples, the failure to pay license fees in a timely
manner, royalty rates, and a breach of warranty all constitute contract
claims. Unlike an action for copyright infringement, in a breach of
contract action only money damages are generally available and not
injunctive relief. A general exception to this rule would be in an
action for specific performance under the contract. Most importantly,
unlike copyright infringement where injunctive relief is a matter of
right, injunctive relief will only be granted in breach of contract
actions where such breach would result in irreparable harm that could
not be adequately remedied by money damages.

### Patent protection of software {#sec_patentusa}

Unlike copyright, patent protection of software is not automatic, and
such protection is largely limited to the jurisdiction issuing the
patent. Whether inventions contained in software constitute patentable
subject matter has been the subject of a great deal of debate and
evolving law in the U.S. Prior to the 1980’s it was generally believed
that one could not obtain a patent on inventions embodied in software,
as such software consisted primarily of algorithms and, by law,
algorithms were deemed unpatentable subject matter. This view first
changed in 1981 in the *Diamond v. Diehr* case when the U.S. Supreme
Court held that the use of an algorithm in software does not preclude it
as patentable subject matter so long as the claimed invention related
solely to the use of the software to solve a specific technological
problem and did not preclude all other uses of the algorithm.[^1420]

The interpretations of patent eligibility of software inventions
continue to evolve. The U.S. Supreme Court in the case of *In re
Bilski*[^1421] held that the machine or transformation test previously
adopted by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, i.e., “(a)
claimed process is surely patent-eligible under § 101 if: (1) it is tied
to a particular machine or apparatus, or (2) it transforms a particular
article into a different state or thing,” constituted a test, although
not the sole test, of whether a process is patent eligible.[^1422] In
any case, inventions embodied in software remain patent eligible in the
U.S., but the scope of that patent protection appears to be narrowing.

A scope of a patent is defined by the claims asserted in the patent. In
patents related to software such claims generally define the broad
outline of the invention in terms of a process. Thus, the claims are not
limited to a particular embodiment of that process (or, like copyright,
to a specific set of written instructions) but may apply to an unlimited
number of embodiments so long as each embodiment incorporates each
element of one of the claims asserted in the patent. As a consequence,
patents related to software may be infringed by numerous computer
programs, and any computer program may infringe the claims of numerous
patents.

#### Exclusive rights {#_exclusive_rights_4}

A patent holder in the U.S. has the exclusive right to make, have made,
use, sell, or import any product made by means of a claimed process or
product embodying the claimed invention.[^1423] As with copyright, these
rights may be assigned or licensed to another either in whole or in
part.

#### Exhaustion and implied licenses {#_exhaustion_and_implied_licenses}

Upon the unrestricted sale (as contrasted with the license) of a
patented invention all patent rights in the invention are exhausted,
i.e., the purchaser has the right to do anything with the purchased
invention without fear of a claim of infringement. Related to the
doctrine of exhaustion are implied licenses. When a patent holder
incorporates the patented invention in a product and sells the product
without an express license to the patent, courts will generally imply
the grant of license since the patent holder essentially invites
infringement. There is a line of cases in the U.S. that interprets the
boundaries of such exhaustion and implied licenses:

-   *Adams v. Burke*[^1424]  — claims that are directly infringed by the
    product are exhausted at the time of sale.

-   *Univis Lens*[^1425] — implied license in claims necessary to finish
    an incomplete product.

-   *Intel v. ULSI*[^1426] — implied license accompanies the sale of
    infringing goods by a licensed manufacturer.

-   *Cyrix v. Intel*[^1427] — implied license in claims necessary to
    make a complete product commercially viable (use for
    intended purpose).

In addition to these cases specifically related to patent claims,
licenses may be implied by courts for a variety of other legal and
equitable reasons. For example, the conduct of the two parties may be
construed as establishing a license. Also, equitable estoppel may be
found where a party knowingly infringes and the patent holder, knowing
of the infringement and objecting to such infringement, takes no action
to halt the infringement, misleading the infringer into believing the
patent holder will not act. Finally, a court may impose legal estoppel
on a patent holder who has licensed or assigned a right, received
consideration, and then sought to derogate from the right granted.

#### Term of protection {#_term_of_protection_6}

Patent protection in the U.S. is granted for a term of 20 years measured
from the date of the filing of the patent application for all patents
issued on or after June 9, 1995.[^1428] For patents issued prior to that
date the term is the longer of 20 years from the date of filing or 17
years from the date of issue; this transition term phasing out on June
9, 2012.

Effective March 13, 2013, the U.S. joined most other national patent
bodies in granting patent protection to the first party to file.[^1429]

#### Extraterritorial reach {#_extraterritorial_reach}

Sec. 271(f) of the Patent Act[^1430] extends infringement liability to
any party who “without authority supplies or causes to be supplied in or
from the United States all or a substantial portion of the components of
a patented invention, where such components are uncombined in whole or
in part, in such manner as to actively induce the combination of such
components outside of the United States in a manner that would infringe
the patent if such combination occurred within the United States.” This
provision had been read to imply that the making outside the U.S. of
copies from of an infringing gold master provided by a U.S. software
developer would constitute additional infringing acts increasing the
liability of the U.S. developer. In the case of *AT&T v.
Microsoft*[^1431] the Supreme Court held that so long as the copies were
made outside the U.S. from a gold master provided from the U.S. no
liability accrued where the infringing act arises from the actual
loading of the software onto a computer or the operation of the software
on that computer.

#### Infringement {#_infringement_2}

Liability for patent infringement arises when a party “without authority
makes, uses, offers to sell, or sells any patented invention, within the
United States or imports into the United States any patented invention
during the term of the patent therefor, infringes the patent.”[^1432]
The Patent Act also recognizes liability for inducing
infringement.[^1433]

A patent that is asserted in an infringement action is presumed to be
valid,[^1434] and at present such validity may only be overcome by clear
and convincing evidence of invalidity. This clear and convincing
evidence standard is higher than the preponderance of the evidence
standard used by patent examiners at the time of examination even if the
evidence supporting invalidity was not before the examiner at the time
of examination.

Remedies for patent infringement include injunctive relief, monetary
damages in the form of a reasonable royalty, and attorney’s fees and
costs of court.[^1435] Where infringement is found to be willful the
court may award treble damages.[^1436] Damages for patent infringement
only begin to accrue when a party has been placed on notice of their
infringement. While such notice may be provided by marking the goods for
patents, such marking rarely occurs with respect to software.
Consequently, notice of infringement of patents related to software
usually only arises upon the giving of written notice to the
infringer.[^1437]

### Other matters of law {#sec_otherusa}

#### Representations, warranties and disclaimers {#_representations_warranties_and_disclaimers}

Although there is a legal distinction between a representation (a fact
that is true at the time of the making of an agreement) and a warranty
(a fact that is true at the time of the making of an agreement and
throughout the term of the agreement unless otherwise limited), U.S.
courts rarely draw such a distinction except in determining the remedy
(revocation for a breach of a representation versus money damages for
breach of a warranty). A representation or warranty constitutes an
assumption of risk on the part of the party making the representation or
warranty. As such, most such representations and warranties must be
expressly stated within the license agreement. However, some warranties
may be implied. Those may include an implied warranty of title (i.e.,
the licensor holds good title to the copyright or patent being license),
of non-infringement (i.e., the licensing of the copyright or patent will
not constitute an infringing act on the part of the licensee with
respect to a third party’s copyright or patent), of merchantability
(i.e., the goods must reasonably conform to an ordinary buyer’s
expectations) and of fitness for a particular purpose (i.e., the goods
are held out by the seller to address a specific purpose). Most
licensors will include a disclaimer of any and all such implied
warranties in order to limit their exposure to only those express
warranties to which they have agreed, and such disclaimers are generally
held valid under principles of contract law. You will often see such
disclaimers stated in all capital letters or bold print; this is
commonly done to conform to the safe harbor provisions of laws
pertaining to warranties, including the Uniform Commercial Code and the
Magnuson-Moss Warranty Act.[^1438]

#### Liability and limitation {#_liability_and_limitation}

Under principles of contract law parties may agree to limit the scope of
liability that may be imposed on a party under a license agreement, and
such limitations are generally held to be valid.

#### Export control {#_export_control}

Although there are numerous other laws that are applicable to the
licensing of software, we only make mention of one here — export
control. U.S. law prohibits the exporting of software incorporating
cryptographic code except under a license issued by the Bureau of
Industry and Security.[^1439] Obligations and liability under the
statute extend beyond the original distributor to any downstream party
that redistributes the software. As a consequence, most original
distributors include in their license a notice of such obligations and
liability.

Analysis of FOSS under United States law {#sec_analysisusa}
----------------------------------------

Rights in FOSS under copyright, patent, and trademark law and the
enforcement of such rights does not differ from other forms of
licensing. The principle question to be addressed in each instance,
particularly with respect to the exercise of rights granted under the
FOSS license is whether any of such rights are subject to conditions.
Absent such conditions applicable to the exercise of the right in
question, such FOSS licenses will be interpreted exclusively under
principles of contract law, and as a consequence, injunctive relief (the
most valuable tool available to a FOSS licensor) is likely to be
unavailable. Consequently, when considering the selection and
enforcement of a FOSS license, the licensor will want to give due
consideration as to whether a court would likely find a condition
limiting the exercise of such right (e.g., the obligations imposed by
the GNU General Public License (GPL) on any party distributing code
licensed under the GPL) or no such condition (e.g., arguably the
Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD) and MIT licenses impose no such
conditions).

FOSS cases in the United States {#sec_casesusa}
-------------------------------

There have been few cases in the U.S. that have addressed the
enforcement of free and open source licenses. Many of the so-called free
and open source cases have dealt primarily with trademark issues.

### Jacobsen v. Katzer {#sec_jacobsenusa}

*Jacobsen v. Katzer*[^1440] is undoubtedly the most important of the
cases addressing free and open source software in the U.S. At issue was
the provision of the Artistic license that requires licensees to include
both copyright notices and a tracking of modifications in derivative
works.

Citing to Nimmer in support of enforcement of the license the court
stated: “An express (or possibly an implied) condition that a licensee
must affix a proper copyright notice to all copies of the work that he
causes to be published will render a publication devoid of such notice
without authority from the licensor and therefore, an infringing
act.”[^1441]

In broad language that would support most, if not all, open source
licenses the court stated:

> Copyright holders who engage in open source licensing have the right
> to control the modification and distribution of copyrighted material…
> Copyright licenses are designed to support the right to exclude; money
> damages alone do not support or enforce that right. The choice to
> exact consideration in the form of compliance with the open source
> requirements of disclosure and explanation of changes, rather than as
> a dollar-denominated fee, is entitled to no less legal recognition.
> Indeed, because a calculation of damages is inherently speculative,
> these types of license restrictions might well be rendered meaningless
> absent the ability to enforce through injunctive relief.
>
> —  Jacobsen 535 F.3d at 1381 (2008).

Although the Jacobsen case later settled, this Federal Circuit ruling
clearly established the enforceability of free and open source licenses
containing at least one condition limiting a licensee’s right to
exercise one or more rights granted under a copyright license.

### Wallace v. International Business Machines Corp. {#sec_wallaceusa}

Although a bit of an odd case and one not directly related to the
enforcement of a free and open source license, *Wallace v. IBM*[^1442]
is worth mentioning because of the antitrust (anti-competition) issue
raised by the plaintiff, Mr. Wallace, i.e., that the distribution of
free and open source software at no cost constitutes illegal price
fixing within the terms of U.S. antitrust law. The court found no such
price fixing or restraint and found the GPL to be “a cooperative
agreement that facilitates production of new derivative works, and
agreements that yield new products that would not arise through
unilateral action are lawful.”[^1443]

### Recommended literature {#_recommended_literature_8}

#### Recommended literature in the United States {#_recommended_literature_in_the_united_states}

-   O. Johnny, M. Miller and M. H. Webbink: Copyright in Open Source
    Software — Understanding the Boundaries

    <http://www.ifosslr.org/ifosslr/article/view/30>

-   M. H. Webbink: Packaging Open Source

    <http://www.ifosslr.org/ifosslr/article/view/26>

-   H. Anderson and T. Dare: Passport Without a Visa: Open Source
    Software Licensing and Trademarks

    <http://www.ifosslr.org/ifosslr/article/view/11>

-   K. Copenhaver: Open Source Policies and Processes for In-Bound
    Software,

    <http://www.ifosslr.org/ifosslr/article/view/27>

-   L. Rosen: Bad Facts Make Good Law: The Jacobsen Case and Open
    Source,

    <http://www.ifosslr.org/ifosslr/article/view/5>

#### Comprehensive books {#_comprehensive_books_2}

-   Andrew M. St. Laurent: Understanding Open Source and Free Software
    Licensing (2008, O’Reilly Media)

-   Lawrence E. Rosen: Open Source Licensing: Software Freedom and
    Intellectual Property Law (2004 Prentice Hall)

-   Heather J. Meeker: The Open Source Alternative: Understanding Risks
    and Leveraging Opportunities (2008 John Wiley & Sons)

Authors {#chap.authors}
=======

Simone Aliprandi (Italy)

:   (b. 1979) is an Italian attorney-at-law and researcher. He got an
    additional degree in Public Administration Science and earned
    a Ph.D. degree in Information Society at the Bicocca University
    of Milan. He founded and still coordinates the Copyleft-Italia.it
    project and has published numerous books devoted to openculture
    and copyleft. He also collaborates as a legal consultant with Array
    (<http://array.eu>).

    <http://www.aliprandi.org>

Juliette Ancelle (Switzerland)

:   is an associate of the boutique law firm id est avocats sàrl. She
    studied at the Universities of Lausanne and Montreal, as well as at
    the New York University School of Law, where she graduated with
    an LL.M. in 2009. She was admitted to the New York State Bar that
    same year. She advises and represents clients mainly in business and
    corporate matters as well as in intellectual property cases,
    including open source. She maintains a on Social Media and
    IP issues.

    <http://www.idest.pro/?hl=en>

Malcolm Bain (Spain)

:   (b. 1966) is an attorney-at-law and partner at id law partners, a
    Barcelona based boutique law firm specialising in ICT law. He is a
    member of the editorial committee of the International Free and Open
    Source Software Law Review, and lectures at several universities in
    Spain on the legal aspects of free and open source law.

    <http://www.id-lawpartners.com>

Shane Coughlan

:   is an expert in communication methods and business development. He
    is best known for building bridges between commercial and
    non-commercial stakeholders in the technology sector. His
    professional accomplishments include establishing a legal department
    for the main NGO promoting Free Software in Europe, building a
    professional network of over 270 legal counsel and technical experts
    across 4 continents, and aligning corporate and community interests
    to launch the first law review dedicated to Free/Open
    Source Software.

Wouter Dammers (The Netherlands)

:   (b. 1985) is an attorney-at-law at LAWFOX Advocatuur in Amsterdam,
    The Netherlands. Wouter specializes in IT law, open source
    compliance, e-commerce, privacy and IP law. Wouter is known for
    providing practical legal advise involving IT and internet
    related issues. He regularly drafts and reviews contracts involving
    software development, IT projects and privacy compliance. Wouter is
    familiar in conducting legal proceedings and providing
    dispute resolution. Wouter finalized his Master Law and Technology
    (cum laude, 2009) and his Master International and European Public
    Law (with merit, 2008) at Tilburg University. Wouter regularly
    blogs, tweets (@WouterDammers) and publishes on IT-related topics.

    <https://www.lawfox.nl>

Arnoud Engelfriet (Introduction)

:   (b. 1974) is an IT lawyer and European patent attorney. He works as
    partner at ICTRecht legal services in the Netherlands. In 2005,
    while working for Royal Philips, he was involved in the software
    patent debate surrounding the Directive and has the mental scars to
    prove it.

    With his computer science background Arnoud focuses on complex
    legal/technical ICT issues and software licenses (in particular
    open source). His blog Ius mentis is one of the most popular sites
    on the subject of IT and law in the Netherlands. Arnoud is a
    part-time teacher at the VU University of Amsterdam.

    <http://ictrecht.nl/>

Tim Engelhardt (Germany)

:   (b. 1974) is an attorney-at-law at the Berlin-based law firm
    JBB Rechtsanwälte. He graduated from the University of Munich and
    Columbia Law School (LL.M.). He completed his doctoral thesis on the
    EU law of geographical indications at the University of Zurich. In
    his practice he specialises in various aspects of IT and IP law. His
    particular focus is on FOSS issues, including both the enforcement
    of FOSS rights and advising on licensing matters.

    <http://www.jbb.de/en>

Eli Greenbaum (Israel)

:   is an attorney at Yigal Arnon & Co. in Jerusalem, specialising in
    intellectual property law and transactions. He has an M.S. in
    Applied Physics from Columbia University and a J.D. from Yale
    Law School. Eli has published widely in the areas of open source
    software and open hardware.

    <http://www.arnon.co.il>

Michel Jaccard (Switzerland)

:   is the founder of id est avocats sàrl, and a widely respected tech
    media, IP and corporate law expert. He studied and worked in
    Lausanne, Geneva and New York and now teaches and publishes
    extensively on legal issues relating to software licensing,
    information technology, business process outsourcing structures,
    data protection and online services. He regularly advises clients on
    intellectual property and technology, as well as on corporate
    acquisitions, disposals and collaboration. He has been a member of
    the editorial committee of the IFOSS law review until Spring 2011.

    <http://www.idest.pro/?hl=en>

Till Jaeger (Germany)

:   (b. 1969) is an attorney-at-law and partner at JBB Rechtsanwälte, a
    Berlin based law firm. Till Jaeger is a founding member of the
    Institute for Legal Questions on Free and Open Source
    Software (ifrOSS) in Germany, which researches legal questions
    regarding the Open Source model (<http://www.ifross.org>). He has
    represented the gpl-violations.org project in several lawsuits to
    enforce the GPL. Till Jaeger was a member of the Committee C in the
    GPLv3 drafting process.

    <http://www.jbb.de/en>

Andrew Katz (United Kingdom)

:   (b. 1966) is a partner at Moorcrofts LLP, a boutique law firm based
    in the Thames Valley, England. He became a barrister in 1990 and in
    1993 requalified (and now practises as) a solicitor. Prior to his
    legal career, Andrew was a programmer. He is a founder editor of the
    International Free and Open Source Software Law Review. He is a
    visiting lecturer at Queen Mary College, University of London, and
    sits on the legal advisory panel of the Open Rights Group, and the
    UK panel for the Free Software Foundation Europe.

    <http://www.moorcrofts.com>

Lucien Cheng-Hsia Lin (Taiwan)

:   (b. 1976) is a legal specialist and management advisor at "Open
    Source Software Foundry, OSSF", a mission-oriented project launched
    and sponsored by the highest academic institution in Taiwan,
    Academia Sinica, from 2003. He is in charge of the analysis and
    interpretation of FOSS licenses, the record and track of FOSS
    business trends and models for OSSF office, and serves as the legal
    lead of Creative Commons Taiwan from 2014. He is also a guest
    lecturer at National Chiao Tung University located in
    Hsinchu, Taiwan.

    <http://www.openfoundry.org/en/about>

Iain G. Mitchell QC (United Kingdom — Scotland)

:   is in private practice as an Advocate (Barrister) in Scotland. He is
    the Chairman of the Scottish Society for Computers & Law, Chairman
    of the Faculty of Advocates Information Technology Group,
    Co-convenor of the Scottish Lawyers European Group, and a Liveryman
    of the Worshipful Company of Information Technologists. He holds
    office as the United Kingdom representative on the Information
    Technology committee of the CCBE and is a member of the IT Panel of
    the Bar Council of England & Wales and of the Scottish Courts
    Technology Forum. He is a member of the editorial committee of the
    International Free and Open Source Software Law Review and was
    editor of the former e-law review. He is recommended in the Legal
    500 for IT Law and is rated in Band 1 for both IT Law and Public
    Procurement Law in the Chambers Directory.

Jongbaek Park (Korea)

:   heads the Open Source Team as a senior partner at Bae Kim & Lee LLC,
    an international law firm based in Korea.He also serves as the
    president of Korea Open Source Law Center, an inter-disciplinary
    organisation dedicated to research, training, providing solutions to
    issues surrounding open source software and hosting annual
    conference, FOSS Con,Korea with FSFE and NIPA. He is a widely
    acknowledged expert in the field of open source software in Korea.
    He has delivered a number of lectures about FOSS licenses at various
    forums and conferences.The author would like to acknowledge
    significant contributions to research by three attorneys, Youngduk
    Rew, former legal coordinator at Korea Open Source Law Center, Hye
    Jin Hwang and Nari Hong.

Fabrice Perbost (France)

:   is a partner in the Paris office of Kahn & Associés. Fabrice advises
    companies in the field of intellectual property and technologies,
    particularly as regards private and public contracts. In the course
    of his activity, Fabrice has developed a specific expertise in the
    Open Source model. Fabrice is a member of several IP/IT working
    groups such as ITechLaw (International Technology Law Association)
    and also a lecturer at two Paris universities.

    <http://www.kahnlaw.com/en>

Carlo Piana (Italy)

:   is an Italian lawyer and a digital liberties activist. He is
    external General Counsel to the Free Software Foundation Europe and
    the President of the Board of the Protocol Freedom Foundation. He
    advises and assists clients in matters concerning information
    technology, Free and Open Source Software, data protection and
    trademarks/domain names. He is a member of the editorial committee
    of the International Free and Open Source Software Law Review.

    <http://array.eu/>

João Pedro Quintais (Portugal)

:   is a PhD candidate at the Institute for Information Law (IViR),
    University of Amsterdam. His current research focuses on alternative
    models to copyright enforcement on the Internet. João Pedro holds an
    LL.M in Intellectual Property and Competition Law from the Munich
    Intellectual Property Law Center. He’s a qualified lawyer, member of
    the Portuguese Bar Association, who has worked since 2004 in the
    intellectual property and information technology areas, both as a
    lawyer and as legal counsel for a multinational software house.

    <http://www.ivir.nl/staff/quintais.html>

Ana Ramalho (Portugal)

:   is an Associate Professor of Intellectual Property at the University
    of South Wales (United Kingdom). Her current research interests are
    the aspects of the intersection between copyright law and European
    Union law, in particular regarding matters of competence. Ana is
    also part of several editorial boards and has served as an ad-hoc
    consultant to IP related organizations such as World Intellectual
    Property Organization (WIPO) or the European Patent Office (EPO).

Andrew Rens (South Africa)

:   (b 1968) is a South African law and technology scholar and attorney.
    He is a Senior Lecturing Fellow at Duke Law School and an attorney
    at Garratt Hugo & De Souza Incorporated, Johannesburg, South Africa.
    He advises commercial and non-profit clients on open source
    licenses, open media licences, open data, open hardware and
    open standards.

    <http://opencounsel.net>

Tomasz Rychlicki (Poland)

:   (b. 1975) is a Polish patent and trade mark attorney and
    IT&IP lawyer. He graduated from the University of Gdańsk, the
    Faculty of Law, European Law Center. Tomasz also studied at
    Chicago-Kent College of Law in the LL.M. Program in International
    Intellectual Property Law. He is a member of the Editorial Board of
    the Journal of Intellectual Property Law & Practice and a country
    correspondent for the Computer and Telecommunications Law Review.
    Tomasz is one of the founding members of the Editorial Committe of
    the International Free and Open Source Software Law Review.

    <http://www.rychlicki.net>

Henri Tanskanen (Finland)

:   is an Associate at HH Partners, Attorneys-at-law Ltd., with a
    background in corporate open source compliance work. He also works
    as an Open Source Specialist for Validos ry, an association
    providing sharing and production of open source compliance
    information to its corporate members.

    <http://www.hhpartners.fi>

Ywein Van den Brande (Belgium)

:   (b. 1977) is an attorney-at-law and partner at Crealaw, a Brussels
    based law firm. With his dual background of lawyer and information
    scientist, Ywein focuses on IT and IP. He is a member of the
    editorial committee of the International Free and Open Source
    Software Law Review. He is a guest lecturer at Groep T/KULeuven.

    <http://www.crealaw.eu>

Wanda van Kerkvoorden (The Netherlands)

:   (b. 1968) is an attorney-at-law and partner at SOLV, an Amsterdam
    based law firm. Wanda is specialised in supervising complex ICT
    projects and conducting legal proceedings involving ICT disputes.
    She also advises on and conducts legal proceedings involving ASP/
    SaaS, cloud computing, compliance and (open source)
    software protection. She is a member of the international
    iTechLaw association.

    <http://www.solv.nl>

Martin von Willebrand (Finland)

:   is the Head of Technology and Partner at HH Partners,
    Attorneys-at-law, Ltd. He is the chairman of Validos ry, an
    association providing sharing and production of open source
    compliance information to its corporate members, including for
    example Fujitsu Finland, Vaisala, Cargotec, Cassidian Finland
    and Tieto. He is a board and steering group member of COSS – The
    Finnish Centre for Open Systems and Solutions. He has widely
    received recommendations for his work mainly in the technology field
    from publications such as Legal 500, Chambers Europe and Who’s
    Who Legal. His clients in the free software field include, in
    addition to many businesses such as Ixonos Oyj, Free Software
    Foundation Europe, the Ministry of Environment of Finland, Validos
    and Aalto University.

    <http://www.hhpartners.fi>

Alan Walter (France)

:   specialises in intellectual property and technologies. He provides
    legal assistance in both advice and litigation in several fields
    like software industry (in particular Open Source matters), Internet
    & innovative technologies regulation, IP, and privacy and
    data protection.

    <alan.walter@runbox.com>

Mark H. Webbink (United States)

:   (b. 1950) is senior lecturing fellow at Duke University School
    of Law. Webbink is the former general counsel of Red Hat, Inc., and
    presently serves on the board of directors of the Software Freedom
    Law Center. A founding member of the editorial board of the
    International Free and Open Source Software Law Review. In May 2011
    Webbink assumed the role of editor and publisher of the well known
    open source blog Groklaw.

    <http://www.nyls.edu/faculty/faculty_profiles/mark_webbink>

Yang Xia (China)

:   is an associate professor at the Law School of Beijing Normal
    University, one of the oldest universities in China. The main
    research field of Mr. Yang Xia focuses on computer law, software law
    and high technology law. Yang Xia teaches Science and Technology
    law, Computer law, Intellectual Property law and Legal English. Yang
    Xia was awarded the European Union Eramus Mundus scholarship for his
    studies at the EU law center of the University of Warsaw and is
    member of CLAST (China Law Association on Science and Technology).

    <http://www.bnu.edu.cn/eng/>

[^1]: Martin Campbell-Kelly, “Development and Structure of the
    International Software Industry, 1950-1990”, Business and Economic
    History 24/2 (1995): 73-110. Also see Richard M. Stallman, “The GNU
    Operating System and the Free Software Movement”, in: Open Sources:
    Voices from the Open Source Revolution, O’Reilly 1999.

[^2]: Steven Levy, Hackers: Heroes of the Computer Revolution, Doubleday
    1984. Also see Peter Salus, The Daemon, The Gnu, And The Penguin,
    Reed Media Services 2008.

[^3]: Burton Grad, “A Personal Recollection: IBM’s Unbundling of
    Software and Services”, IEEE Annals of the History of Computing,
    vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 64-71, Jan.-Mar. 2002 and Thomas W. Hamilton,
    “IBM’s unbundling decision: Consequences for users and the
    industry”, Programming Sciences Corporation, 1969.

[^4]: Paul E. Ceruzzi, A History of Modern Computing, MIT Press 1998.

[^5]: “Legal Protection for Computer Programs: a Survey and Analysis of
    National legislation and Case Law” by Michael S. Keplinger (document
    UNESCO/WIPO/GE/CCS/2). Also see the Model provisions on the
    protection of computer software, prepared by the International
    Bureau of the World Intellectual Property Organization, 1978.

[^6]: Computer Software Copyright Act of 1980, following the Final
    Report of the National Commission on New Technological Uses of
    Copyrighted Works (CONTU) of 31 July 1978. Also see Mark A. Lemley
    et al., Software And Internet Law, Aspen Law & Business 2000, pp.
    34-35.

[^7]: Council Directive 91/250/EEC of 14 May 1991 on the legal
    protection of computer programs.

[^8]: Thom Holwerda, “Borland in the 1980s: ‘Treat Software Just Like a
    Book’”, OSNews 15 oktober 2009,
    <http://www.osnews.com/story/22342/Borland_in_the_1980s_Treat_Software_Just_Like_a_Book_>.

[^9]: See e.g. H. Ward Classen, A practical guide to software licensing
    for licensees and licensors, American Bar Association, Section of
    Business Law 2007, p. 149-152, Lawrence D. Graham, Legal battles
    that shaped the computer industry, Greenwood Publishing Group 1999,
    p. 119-125, Clive Gringras, “The Validity of Shrink-Wrap Licences”,
    International Journal of Law and Information. Technology 4(2), p.
    77-111, R.H. Stern, “Shrink-wrap license restrictions-preempted?”,
    IEEE Micro 17(1), Jan/Feb 1997, p. 75-78 and David L. Hayes, “The
    enforceability of shrink-wrap license agreements on-line and
    off-line”, Fenwick & West, March 1997. The most famous case was
    ProCD, Inc. v. Zeidenberg, 86 F.3d 1447 (7th Cir. 1996), in which
    the US appeals court held that a shrink-wrap license was valid and
    enforceable as a contract, provided they do not otherwise violate
    generally accepted principles of contract law.

[^10]: In Europe, Directive 91/250/EEC provides a right to decompile if
    that is “indispensable to obtain the information necessary to
    achieve interoperability” but sets limitations so severe it is hard
    to come up with a real-world case that evidently would prevail in
    court. Also see Blaney Harper and Vaishali Udupa, “Drafting
    Electronic Software Licenses to Prevent Reverse Engineering”, Jones
    Day February 2004.

[^11]: Richard M. Stallman, “The GNU Operating System and the Free
    Software Movement”, in: Open Sources: Voices from the Open Source
    Revolution, O''Reilly 1999. Also see Sam Williams, Free as in
    Freedom: Richard Stallman’s Crusade for Free Software, O’Reilly
    2002.

[^12]: Robert Young, “Interview with Linus, the Author of Linux”, Linux
    Journal, 1 March 1994.

[^13]: Greg Lehey, The complete FreeBSD: documentation from the source,
    O’Reilly 2003, pp. 8-9.

[^14]: Marshall Kirk McKusick, “Twenty Years of Berkeley Unix”, in: Open
    Sources: Voices from the Open Source Revolution, O’Reilly 1999.

[^15]: Mike Linksvayer, “The Choice of a GNU Generation — An Interview
    With Linus Torvalds”, Meta magazine 1993.
    <http://gondwanaland.com/meta/history/interview.html>.

[^16]: Bruce Perens, “The Open Source Definition”, in: Open Sources:
    Voices from the Open Source Revolution, O’Reilly 1999.

[^17]: Eric S. Raymond, “Goodbye, ‘free software’; hello, ‘open
    source’”, 16 June 2007 <http://www.catb.org/~esr/open-source.html>.
    Also see Eric S. Raymond, The Cathedral and the Bazaar: Musings on
    Linux and Open Source by an Accidental Revolutionary, O’Reilly 2001.

[^18]: History of the OSI, <http://www.opensource.org/history>.

[^19]: Richard M. Stallman, Why “Open Source” misses the point of Free
    Software, GNU.org 24 September 2007,
    <http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/open-source-misses-the-point.html>.

[^20]: Top 20 Most Commonly Used Licenses in Open Source Projects, Black
    Duck Open Source Resource Center, April 2011.

[^21]: Lawrence Rosen, Open Source Licensing, Prentice Hall PTR, 2005,
    Andrew M. St. Laurent, Understanding open source and free software
    licensing, O’Reilly 2004 and of course the very book you are reading
    now.

[^22]: Progress Software Corp. v. MySQL AB, Civil Action No. 01-11031
    PBS, filed on June 15, 2001.

[^23]: “On Behalf of BusyBox Developers, SFLC Files First Ever U.S. GPL
    Violation Lawsuit”, Software Freedom Law Center 20 September 2007.
    Other cases brought involved Xterasys, High-Gain Antennas and
    Verizon Communications. Compare Eben Moglen, “Enforcing the GNU
    GPL”, GNU.org 10 September 2001.

[^24]: SCO vs. IBM was filed in 2003 as a \$1 billion lawsuit alleging
    that IBM had somehow harmed SCO by contributing to Linux. Particular
    allegations involved copyright claims on number codes for Linux
    interfaces and the unconstitutionality of the GPL. Wallace vs. FSF
    (467 F.3d 1104, 7th Cir. 2006) alleged the GPL was a form of illegal
    price fixing. His pro se lawsuit was thrown out after the plaintiff
    failed to state an actionable claim despite three chances to do so.

[^25]: Jacobsen v. Katzer, 535 F.3d 1373 (Fed. Cir. 2008).

[^26]: This touches upon the legal question whether a FOSS license is to
    be regarded as a contract, as a bare license, as a declaration of
    promissory estoppel or another legal construct. See e.g. Pamela
    Jones, “The GPL is a license, not a contract”, LWN.net 3 December
    2003, <http://lwn.net/Articles/61292/>, Eben Moglen, “Enforcing the
    GNU GPL”, GNU.org 10 September 2001, Lawrence Rosen, Open Source
    Licensing, Prentice Hall PTR, 2005 , page 53-54 and Axel Metzger and
    Till Jaeger, “Open Source Software and German Copyright Law”, IIC
    Vol. 32, 2001, p. 52.

[^27]: J. Höppner, “The GPL prevails: An analysis of the first-ever
    Court decision on the validity and effectivity of the GPL”, (2004)
    1:4 SCRIPT-ed 628.

[^28]: Most recently, the Regional Court of Hamburg found FANTEC GmbH
    guilty of violating the GPL in their media player. Notably, Fantec’s
    reliance on its suppliers was deemed insufficient. LG Hamburg
    14.06.2013, AZ 308 O 10/13,
    <http://www.ifross.org/sites/default/files/130618%20Urteil%20Fantec.pdf>

[^29]: About the gpl-violations.org project,
    <http://gpl-violations.org/about.html#history>

[^30]: Act regarding the transposition into Belgian law of the European
    Directive of 14 May 1991 on the legal protection of computer
    programs of 30 June 1994, Belgian Official Gazette B.S., 27 July
    1994.

[^31]: For a history of software protection in Belgium, see Keustermans,
    J., in International Computer Law (Matthew Bender & Company,
    December 2008), 7-29.

[^32]: Act regarding the copyright and neighbouring rights of 30 June
    1994, Belgian Official Gazette B.S., 27 July 1994.

[^33]: See also President Brussels, June 30, 2003, 2004, p. 153;
    Criminal Court Hasselt, February 16, 1999, 1998-99, p. 1424.

[^34]: Law concerning the conversion into Belgian law of the European
    Directive of May 14, 1991 concerning the legal protection of
    computer programs, article 1.

[^35]: Software Act, art. 2.

[^36]: Copyright Act, Art. 2. Certain courts decided that registration
    of a computer program with the US Copyright Office is an indication
    of its originality, e.g., Pres. Liège, August 30, 1994, Computerr.
    1994, p. 63.

[^37]: J., KEUSTERMANS, Auteursrecht - Recente evoluties in capita
    selecta, Cahiers Antwerp Brussels Ghent 2009/2, p. 12.

[^38]: A., BERENBOOM, Le nouveau droit d’auteur et les droits voisins,
    Brussels, Larcier, 2008, p. 53.

[^39]: J., CORBET, APR, Antwerp, E. Story-Scientia, 1997, p. 27 and F.,
    DE VISSCHER and B., MICHAUX, Précis du droit d’auteur et des droits
    voisins, Bruylant, Brussels, 2000, p. 18.

[^40]: Copyright Act, art. 1.

[^41]: Software Act, art. 3; H., VANHEES., “Auteursrechtelijk beschermde
    werken en software gemaakt in uitvoering van een arbeidsovereenkomst
    of statuut”, Orientatie August/September 1994, p. 169.

[^42]: Court of First Instance Liège, September 22, 2000, JLMB 2001,
    p. 64.

[^43]: Software Act, art. 7: *§ 1. The authorization of the rightholder
    shall not be required where reproduction of the code and translation
    of its form within the meaning of article 5, a) and b) are
    indispensable to obtain the information necessary to achieve the
    interoperability of an independently created computer program with
    other programs, provided that the following conditions are met: a)
    the reproduction or translation is performed by a person having a
    right to use a copy of the program, or on his behalf by a person
    authorized to do so; b) the information necessary to achieve
    interoperability has not previously been readily and easily
    available to the person referred to in subparagraph a); c) the
    reproduction and the translation are confined to the parts of the
    original program which are necessary to achieve interoperability. §
    2. The provisions of the previous paragraph shall not commit the
    information obtained through its application: a) to be used for a
    goal other than to achieve the interoperability of the independently
    created computer program; b) to be given to third parties, except
    when necessary for the interoperability of the independently created
    computer program; c) or to be used for the development, production
    or marketing of a computer program substantially similar in its
    expression, or for any other acts which infringe copyright. § 3. The
    provisions of this article may not be interpreted in such a way as
    to allow its application to be used in a manner which unreasonably
    prejudices to rightholders legitimate intrests or conflicts with a
    normal exploitation of the computer program.* See also Dévelopements
    réecents concernant la distinction entre l’idée et l’oeuvre protégée
    par le droit d’auteur, in La protection des idées, A.L.A.I., Parijs,
    1994, p. 75.

[^44]: Software Act, art. 8.

[^45]: See N., NAEYAERT, “De broncode en het faillissement van de
    softwareleverancier”, Jura. Falc. 1995-96, p. 535.

[^46]: The Copyright Act also contains the right moral right to make the
    work known to the public.

[^47]: Berner Conventie art. 6bis 1.

[^48]: Berner Conventie art. 6bis 2.

[^49]: It is the question whether anyone will be able to demonstrate a
    sufficient interest in enforcing these moral rights more than 70
    year after the death of the author. See F., DE VISSCHER and B.,
    MICHAUX, Précis du droit d’auteur et des droits voisins, Bruylant,
    Brussels, 2000, p. 168.

[^50]: According to Prof. Berenboom the author of software will not be
    able to invoke this third right. See, A., BERENBOOM, Le nouveau
    droit d’auteur et les droits voisins, Larcier, Brussels, 2005,
    p. 278.

[^51]: F., BRISON en J.P., TRIAILLE, “La nouvelle loi sur la protection
    du programme d’ordinateur, dans le sillage de la loi sur le droit
    d’auteur”, 1995, p.142.

[^52]: Copyright Act, art. 1 §2.

[^53]: A., BERENBOOM, Le nouveau droit d’auteur et les droits voisins,
    Larcier, Brussel, 2005, p. 278.

[^54]: The Fiduciary License Agreement of FSFE expressly stipulates that
    it leaves the moral and/or personal rights of the author unaffected
    (FLA §1 (2)); also see Y., VAN DEN BRANDE, “The Fiduciary License
    Agreement: Appointing Legal guardians for Free Software Projects”,
    IFOSS L. Rev., Vol 1, Issue 1, p. 11.

[^55]: See also K. J., KOELMAN, “Brothers in arms: Open source software
    en auteursrecht”, 2004, p. 232.

[^56]: Software Act, art. 9.

[^57]: Copyright Act, art. 3.

[^58]: Software Act, art. 3; H., VANHEES., “Auteursrechtelijk beschermde
    werken en software gemaakt in uitvoering van een arbeidsovereenkomst
    of statuut”, Orientatie August/September 1994, p. 169.

[^59]: Belgian Copyright law of 30 June 1994, article 3, §2.

[^60]: Belgian Copyright law of 30 June 1994, article 3, §1.

[^61]: Belgian Copyright law of 30 June 1994, article 3, §1.

[^62]: Software Act, art. 11.

[^63]: Note however that other laws and regulations such as competition
    law and patents might restrict the use (J., KEUSTERMANS,
    “Octrooieerbaarheid van computerprogramma’s revisited”, in
    Intellectuele rechten in de informatiemaatschappij (Ed. M.-C.,
    JANSSENS), Brussels, Bruylant, 1998, p. 209 and M.-C., JANSSENS,
    “Bescherming van computerprogramma’s: (lang) niet alleen maar
    auteursrecht”, 1998, p. 420).

[^64]: A., BERENBOOM, Le nouveau droit d’auteur et les droits voisins,
    Larcier, Brussel, 2005, p. 326.

[^65]: Y., VAN DEN BRANDE and J., KEUSTERMANS, “FOSS: een analyse naar
    Belgisch recht”, I.R.D.I. 2007, p. 370.

[^66]: E.N.M., VISSER, “GNU General Public License — All rights
    reversed?”, Computerr. 2004, p. 227.

[^67]: J., TRIAILLE, “L’application de la loi aux logiciels”, 2004,
    p. 437.

[^68]: Y., VAN DEN BRANDE and J., KEUSTERMANS, “Open source software:
    een analyse naar Belgisch recht”, I.R.D.I. 2007, p. 371.

[^69]: Y., VAN DEN BRANDE and J., KEUSTERMANS, “Open source software:
    een analyse naar Belgisch recht”, I.R.D.I. 2007, p. 373; see also
    S., VAN CAMP, “FOSS: de ondraaglijke lichtheid van een concept”,
    T.B.H. 2006, p. 499.

[^70]: Such as software developed by employees (Software Act, art. 3),
    and software developed for hire under a contractual transfer of
    copyrights.

[^71]: F., DE VISSCHER and B., MICHAUX, Précis du droit d’auteur et des
    droits voisins, Bruylant, Brussels, 2000, p. 37.

[^72]: See J. CORBET, Auteursrecht, A.P.R., E. Story-Scientia,
    Antwerpen, 1997, p. 19 and A., STROWEL, “Régime de l’oeuvre de
    collaboration”, in Huldeboek Jan Corbet, De Belgische Auteurswet,
    Artikelsgewijze commentaar, ed. F., BRISON and H., VANHEES, Larcier,
    Ghent, 2006, p. 33.

[^73]: A., BERENBOOM, Le nouveau droit d’auteur et les droits voisins,
    Larcier, Brussels, 2005, p. 197; see also. Court of first instance
    Brussels, 17 June 2002, AM 2004, p. 252.

[^74]: “Indivisible works” are governed by article 4 of the general
    Belgian Copyright Act. “Divisible works” are governed by article 5
    of the same act. For an analysis of “divisible works”, see J.
    CORBET, Auteursrecht, E. Story-Scientia, Antwerp 1997, p. 19 and A.,
    STROWEL, “Régime de l’oeuvre de collaboration”, in Huldeboek Jan
    Corbet, De Belgische Auteurswet, Artikelsgewijze commentaar, ed. F.,
    BRISON and H., VANHEES, Larcier, Ghent, p. 36.

[^75]: E., Laevens, “Onderlinge contractuele vrijheid van coauteurs met
    betrekking tot hun gemeenschappelijk werk, vroeger en nu”, I.R.D.I.
    1996, p. 19.

[^76]: A., BERENBOOM, Le nouveau droit d’auteur et les droits voisins,
    Larcier, Brussels, 2005, p. 198; J. CORBET, Auteursrecht, E.
    Story-Scientia, Antwerp 1997, p. 19.

[^77]: A., BERENBOOM, Le nouveau droit d’auteur et les droits voisins,
    Larcier, Brussels, 2005, p. 198.

[^78]: Articles 1134 and 1135 Belgian Civil Code.

[^79]: Copyright Act, art. 4, al. 2.

[^80]: A., STROWEL, “Régime de l’oeuvre de collaboration”, in Huldeboek
    Jan Corbet, De Belgische Auteurswet, Artikelsgewijze commentaar, ed.
    F., BRISON and H., VANHEES, Larcier, Ghent, p. 36.

[^81]: A., BERENBOOM, Le nouveau droit d’auteur et les droits voisins,
    Larcier, Brussels, 2005, p.198, nr. 115, footnote 10; Pres.
    Brussels, 12 februari 1980, Ing. Cons. 1980, p. 20, Pas. 1980, III,
    p. 63.

[^82]: F., DE VISSCHER and B., MICHAUX, Précis du droit d’auteur et des
    droits voisins, Bruylant, Brussels, 2000, p. 41.

[^83]: The copyright holders on the original work don’t obtain any
    rights in the derivative work. They can however, restrict or stop
    the exploitation of the derivative work (F., DE VISSCHER and B.,
    MICHAUX, Précis du droit d’auteur et des droits voisins, Bruylant,
    Brussels, 2000, p. 42).

[^84]: FSFE (Free Software Foundation Europe) recommends that developers
    of Free Software projects use its Fiduciary License Agreement (FLA)
    to assign their rights to a fiduciary (preferably the FSFE). For an
    analysis of the FLA also under Belgian law, see Y., VAN DEN BRANDE,
    “The Fiduciary Licence Agreement: Appointing legal guardians for
    Free Software Projects”, IFOSS L. Rev., Vol 1, Issue 1, p. 9.

[^85]: F., DE VISSCHER and B., MICHAUX, Précis du droit d’auteur et des
    droits voisins, Bruylant, Brussels, 2000, p. 405.

[^86]: Creative Commons tried to solve the moral rights issue by
    transposing the -original American- licenses to local law. See N.,
    HENDRIKS, “Creative commons in Nederland: flexibel auteursrecht”,
    Tijdschrift voor Auteurs-, Media- & Informatierecht, 2006, 1, p.6.

[^87]: OSD Clause 5.

[^88]: OSD Clausule 6. Bruce Perens indicates, e.g., that an author of
    FOSS cannot provide a clause that prohibits the use of the software
    by regimes such as the former South African apartheidsregime (B.,
    PERENS, “The FOSS Definition”, <http://perens.com/OSD.html>).

[^89]: F., DE VISSCHER and B., MICHAUX, Précis du droit d’auteur et des
    droits voisins, Bruylant, Brussels, 2000, p. 147 iuncto p. 229.

[^90]: A., BERENBOOM, Le nouveau droit d’auteur et les droits voisins,
    Larcier, Brussels, 2005, p. 278.

[^91]: The Fiduciary License Agreemet of FSFE expressly stipulates that
    it leaves the moral and/or personal rights of the author unaffected
    (FLA §1 (2)); also see Y., VAN DEN BRANDE, “The Fiduciary License
    Agreement: Appointing Legal guardians for Free Software Projects”,
    IFOSS L. Rev., Vol 1, Issue 1, p. 11.

[^92]: F., DE VISSCHER and B., MICHAUX, Précis du droit d’auteur et des
    droits voisins, Bruylant, Brussels, 2000, p. 43.

[^93]: F., DE VISSCHER and B., MICHAUX, Précis du droit d’auteur et des
    droits voisins, Bruylant, Brussels, 2000, p. 41.

[^94]: C., De Preter and H., Dekeyser, “De totstandkoming en draagwijdte
    van open source-licenties”, Computerr. 2004, p. 216.

[^95]: GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE (GPL) version 3, article 10,
    <http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html>.

[^96]: GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE (GPL) version 2, article 6,
    <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/old-licenses/gpl-2.0.html>.

[^97]: See also the discussion under Dutch law in Computerrecht, M.W.,
    SCHELTEMA and T.F.E., TJONG TJIN TAI, “Overeenkomsten sluiten door
    openen en klikken?”, Computerr. 2003, p. 244; P.H., BLOK and T.J.M.,
    DE WEERD, “Shrink-wrap- en click-wraplicenties zijn aanvaardbaar”,
    Computerr. 2004, p. 126; R.J.J., WESTERDIJK, “Openen en klikken:
    overeenkomst gesloten”, Computerr. 2004, p. 280.

[^98]: OSD Clausule 10.

[^99]: See also Pres. Rotterdam, 5 december 2002, 2003, p. 149, with
    note of A., LODDER.

[^100]: E.P.M., THOLE and W., SEINEN, “FOSS-softwarelicenties: een
    civielrechtelijke analyse”, Computerr. 2004, p. 223; similarly, with
    respect to Creative Commons licenses on pictures, Court of first
    instance Amsterdam, 9 maart 2006, 2006, p. 273, with comment Y., VAN
    DEN BRANDE and J., KEUSTERMANS.

[^101]: Unless a legal exception applies.

[^102]: K. J., KOELMAN, “Brothers in arms: FOSS en auteursrecht”, .
    2004, p. 230; see also Y., COOL, “Interprétation de la principale
    licence de logiciel libre: liberté du code et contraintes de
    l’interprète”, 2005, p. 32.

[^103]: Y., VAN COUTER and B., VANBRABANT, Handboek
    licentieovereenkomsten, Bibliotheek Handelsrecht Larcier, Gent,
    2008, p. 92.

[^104]: See e.g., the BSD license
    (<http://www.opensource.org/licenses/bsd-license>): THIS SOFTWARE IS
    PROVIDED BY &lt;copyright holder&gt; “AS IS” AND ANY EXPRESS OR
    IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
    WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
    ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL &lt;copyright holder&gt; BE LIABLE
    FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
    CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
    SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR
    BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF
    LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING
    NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS
    SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

[^105]: B., PERENS, “The Open Source Definition”, Open Sources: Voices
    from the Open Source Revolution, <http://perens.com/OSD.html>.

[^106]: See e.g., M., OLSON, “Dual Licensing”, in Open Sources 2.0: The
    Continuing Evolution (Ed. C., DiBona, D., Cooper and M., Stone),
    O’Reilly, 2006, p. 35.

[^107]: The GNU General Public License expressly allows this (GPL v. 2,
    art. 11; GPL v. 3, art. 7).

[^108]: E., KINDT and K., WAGNER, “De transmillenniumproblematiek
    benaderd vanuit het Belgisch recht”, Computerr. 1997, p. 272, note
    66.

[^109]: S., VAN CAMP, “Open Source Software: de ondraaglijke lichtheid
    van een concept”, T.B.H. 2006, p. 503 and 505.

[^110]: Nor the principles (freedoms) of the Free Software movement, nor
    the Open Source Definition mandate the copyleft clause. Several FOSS
    licenses don’t contain a copyleft clause. Examples hereof are the
    Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD) license and the Apache license.

[^111]: E.g., GPL version 3 Art. 5 stipulates: *You must license the
    entire work, as a whole, under this License to anyone who comes into
    possession of a copy. This License will therefore apply, along with
    any applicable section 7 additional terms, to the whole of the work,
    and all its parts, regardless of how they are packaged. This License
    gives no permission to license the work in any other way, but it
    does not invalidate such permission if you have separately received
    it.* GPL version 2 Art. 2 b stipulates: *You must cause any work
    that you distribute or publish, that in whole or in part contains or
    is derived from the Program or any part thereof, to be licensed as a
    whole at no charge to all third parties under the terms of this
    License*.

[^112]: See e.g., M., OLSON, “Dual Licensing”, in Open Sources 2.0: The
    Continuing Evolution (Ed. C., DiBona, D., Cooper and M., Stone),
    O’Reilly, 2006.

[^113]: See also C., De Preter and H., Dekeyser, “De totstandkoming en
    draagwijdte van Open Source-licenties”, Computerr. 2004, p. 220.

[^114]: S., VAN CAMP, “Open Source Software: de ondraaglijke lichtheid
    van een concept”, T.B.H. 2006, p. 494.

[^115]: “The author or the authors of the derivative work are ‘bound by
    feet and hands’ to the author(s) of the first work” (F., DE VISSCHER
    and B., MICHAUX, Précis du droit d’auteur et des droits voisins,
    Bruylant, Brussels, 2000, p. 43).

[^116]: Court of Cassation 19 januari 1956, Pas., 1956, I, 484-502.

[^117]: See e.g., F., BRISON, “Het bestemmingsrecht van auteurs en
    houders van naburige rechten”, note under Brussels, 9 september
    2002, 2004, p. 329; J., CORBET, APR, E. Story-Scientia, 1997, p. 46;
    F., DE VISSCHER and B., MICHAUX, Précis du droit d’auteur et des
    droits voisins, Bruylant, Brussels, 2000, p. 81; A., BERENBOOM, Le
    nouveau droit d’auteur et les droits voisins, Larcier, Brussels,
    2005, p. 215 ; regarding a critique on the right of destination, see
    S. DUSSOLLIER, Droit d’auteur et protection des oeuvres dans
    l’univers numérique, Brussels, Larcier, 2007, p. 337-356.

[^118]: See e.g., F., GOTZEN, “De algemene beginselen van de
    vermogensrechten en van de morele rechten van de auteur volgens de
    Wet van 30 juni 1994”, in Belgisch auteursrecht — Van oud naar nieuw
    (Ed. F., Gotzen), Brussels, Bruylant, 1996, p. 74. and F., BRISON,
    “Het bestemmingsrecht van auteurs en houders van naburige rechten”,
    note under Brussels, 9 september 2002, AM 2004, p. 332.

[^119]: The proof that third parties know the destination is a question
    of facts, no particular formal evidence is needed (F., GOTZEN, “De
    algemene beginselen van de vermogensrechten en van de morele rechten
    van de auteur volgens de Wet van 30 juni 1994”, in Belgisch
    auteursrecht — Van oud naar nieuw (Ed. F., Gotzen), Brussels,
    Bruylant, 1996, p. 74).

[^120]: P., LAURENT, “Les licenses de type open source ou open content
    ne se fondent pas sur un «droit de destination»”, 2007, p. 369.

[^121]: Handboek licentieovereenkomsten, Bibliotheek Handelsrecht
    Larcier, Ghent, 2008, p. 92.

[^122]: Y., VAN DEN BRANDE and J., KEUSTERMANS, noot bij Rb. Amsterdam,
    9 maart 2006, AM 2006, afl. 3, p. 277 and Y., VAN DEN BRANDE and
    J.KEUSTERMANS, “Open source software: een analyse naar Belgisch
    recht”, I.R.D.I. 2007, p. 378.

[^123]: M.-C. Janssens, “De beschermingsomvang in het auteursrecht: een
    balans na tien jaar toepassing van de Wet van 1994”, AM 2004,
    p. 444.

[^124]: A., BERENBOOM, Le nouveau droit d’auteur et les droits voisins,
    Larcier, Brussels, 2005, p. 48.

[^125]: S., VAN CAMP, “Open Source Software: de ondraaglijke lichtheid
    van een concept”, T.B.H. 2006, p. 497. See also M., DOLMANS, “Main
    Provisions of EC Competition Law”, in (Eds. E. J., LOUWERS and C.,
    PRINS), M., Bender, 2005, § 4.02 (D) (3).

[^126]: GPL v. 3 stipulates otherwise. The Open Source Definition
    prohibits this under clause 9.

[^127]: Sofware Act, art. 5. See also Software Directive, art. 4, c.

[^128]: F., DE VISSCHER and B., MICHAUX, Précis du droit d’auteur et des
    droits voisins, Bruylant, Brussels, 2000, p. 88.

[^129]: Article 1382 Belgian Civil Code.

[^130]: Free translation: “in such a way that the harmed person finds
    himself in the position wherein he would have been if the fault
    whereof he complains hadn’t been committed” Court of Cassation, 13
    May 2009, available on <http://www.cass.be>.

[^131]: J., KEUSTERMANS and T., DE MAERE, “Foutbegrip en
    schadevergoeding in het auteursrecht: ‘\`double damage”?’', comment
    on Ghent, 19 January 2009, 2009, p. 388.

[^132]: F., DE VISSCHER and B., MICHAUX, Précis du droit d’auteur et des
    droits voisins, Bruylant, Brussels, 2000, p. 229.

[^133]: J., TRIAILLE e.g. states that the author of FOSS in case of
    infringement can’t claim royaliteis, as he gave up his right to
    royalties by distributing his work under a FOSS license on the
    internet. See J., TRIAILLE, “Licences ‘\`Open Source” et contrats
    avec les auteurs et les distributeurs’', 2005, p. 58-59.

[^134]: In like manner with pictures published on the internet under a
    Creative Commons license: the author of this contribution criticizes
    a ruling of a Dutch Court wherein it states that the commercial
    value of the pictures concerned must be limited as they are
    accessible to all via the internet (Y., VAN DEN BRANDE and J.,
    KEUSTERMANS, comment on Court of first instance Amsterdam, 9 March
    2006, 2006, p. 277).

[^135]: See e.g. C., DIBONA, D., COOPER and M., STONE, “Introduction”,
    in Open Sources 2.0: The Continuing Evolution (Ed. C., DiBona, D.,
    Cooper and M., Stone), O’Reilly, 2006, p. XXX.

[^136]: Add-ons are additions to the free work to which the author
    reserves all rights, and which can only be used against payment.

[^137]: See e.g. M., OLSON, “Dual Licensing”, in Open Sources 2.0: The
    Continuing Evolution (Ed. C., DiBona, D., Cooper and M., Stone),
    O’Reilly, 2006, p. 35.

[^138]: Official Finnish version:
    <http://www.finlex.fi/fi/laki/ajantasa/1961/19610404>. Official
    Swedish version
    <http://www.finlex.fi/sv/laki/ajantasa/1961/19610404> and the
    unofficial translation to English
    <http://www.finlex.fi/en/laki/kaannokset/1961/en19610404>. Links
    retrieved on 8 November 2013.

[^139]: The first of the amendments was enacted prior to the Directive,
    as many principles of the Directive were already anticipated at the
    time. The original paragraphs enacted then have thereafter been
    modified and replaced in subsequent amendments.

[^140]: Article 1, paragraph 3 of the Computer Programs Directive
    (91/250/EEC).

[^141]: See Haarmann 2005, pages 62 and 74. This interpretation,
    however, is not supported by the preparatory works to the Copyright
    Act which indicate that the same criteria of originality should be
    applied to computer programs and other works protected under the Act
    (HE 211/1992, p. 3).

[^142]: Preparatory works HE 161/90 (Government Proposal for amending
    the Copyright Act) and KM 1987:8 (Report of the Copyright
    Committee); for decisions by the Copyright Council, see the
    following footnote.

[^143]: There are no Supreme Court prejudicates where the Court would
    have assessed a particular computer program’s eligibility for
    copyright protection or discussed the matter in detail. However,
    this question is discussed in two decisions by the Appeal Court of
    Helsinki, issued on 28 December 1999 (R 99/661) and 20 June 2006 (S
    04/1824), as well as a decision by the Appeal Court of Turku, issued
    on 9 February 1988. In addition to the above, this question has been
    covered in several decisions of the Copyright Council (see, e.g., TN
    1989:7, TN 1996:3, 1997:12, TN 1997:18, TN 2005:7, TN 2008:13 and TN
    2011:15).

[^144]: See preparatory works Government Proposal HE 161/90, under
    Article 40 b of the detailed argumentation.

[^145]: These arguments have been presented in the preparatory works of
    Article 40 b (Government Proposal HE 161/90), under specific
    argumentation on the Article.

[^146]: This is a logical conclusion based on the wording of Article 4
    of the Act. The same result is presented by Haarmann (2005), page
    245.

[^147]: This has been described in more detail under
    [section\_title](#sec_finland_AuthorsBeneficiaries).

[^148]: The legal criteria and case-law on the threshold of copyright
    protection for computer programs has been presented in more detail
    above under [section\_title](#sec_finland_copyrightact).

[^149]: Article 9 of the Copyright Act lists works that are not subject
    to copyright protection, such as Acts and Decrees, and can therefore
    be considered to be in the public domain. However, this is not an
    acknowledgment of the concept of granting a work into the public
    domain as decided by the author.

[^150]: For discussion on the content of moral rights, see under
    [section\_title](#sec_finland_moral_rights).

[^151]: Haarmann 2005, page 104.

[^152]: FSFE (Free Software Foundation Europe) recommends that
    developers of Free Software projects use its Fiduciary License
    Agreement (FLA) to assign their rights to a fiduciary (preferably
    the FSFE). For an analysis of the FLA under Belgian law, see Y., VAN
    DEN BRANDE, “The Fiduciary Licence Agreement: Appointing legal
    guardians for Free Software Projects”, IFOSS L. Rev., Vol 1, Issue
    1, p. 9.

[^153]: This has been discussed earlier under
    [section\_title](#sec_finland_copyright_assignment).

[^154]: B. PERENS, “The Open Source Definition”, *Open Sources: Voices
    from the Open Source Revolution*, <http://perens.com/OSD.html>.

[^155]: Nor the principles (freedoms) of the Free Software movement, nor
    the Open Source Definition mandate the use of a copyleft clause.
    Several FOSS licenses do not contain a copyleft clause at all, such
    as the Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD) license or the Apache
    license.

[^156]: E.g., GPL version 3 Art. 5 stipulates: “You must license the
    entire work, as a whole, under this License to anyone who comes into
    possession of a copy. This License will therefore apply, along with
    any applicable section 7 additional terms, to the whole of the work,
    and all its parts, regardless of how they are packaged. This License
    gives no permission to license the work in any other way, but it
    does not invalidate such permission if you have *separately*
    received it.” GPL version 2 Art. 2 b stipulates: “You must cause any
    work that you distribute or publish, that in whole or in part
    contains or is derived from the Program or any part thereof, to be
    licensed as a whole at no charge to all third parties under the
    terms of this License.”

[^157]: The Copyright Council is a government-appointed council which
    issues judicially non-binding opinions on the application of the
    Copyright Act. The Council is mainly composed of representatives of
    major right holders and users of copyright-protected works, while
    the chair, vice-chair and at least one member of the Council are
    impartial appointees. Opinions of the Copyright Council can be
    requested by any person or entity whether or not they have personal
    interests in the matter. It is not uncommon that a party to a civil
    or criminal procedure requests an opinion from the Council regarding
    a copyright-related question.

[^158]: Cass. Ass.plén., March 1986,: JCP G 1986, II, 20631; Cass. Civ.
    1ère, 16 April 1991,: JCP G 1991, II, 21770.

[^159]: Cass. Crim., 27 February 1845: DP 1845, 1, p. 130.

[^160]: Article L. 131-3 of the French Intellectual Property Code.

[^161]: P-Y Gautier, *Propriété littéraire et artistique*, PUF, 6th
    edition 2007, n° 532.

[^162]: Cass. Ass.plén., 7 March 1986, op. cit.

[^163]: M. Clément-Fontaine, *Les oeuvres libres*, Thèse Montpellier,
    2006.

[^164]: M. Clément-Fontaine, *Les oeuvres libres*, op. cit.

[^165]: See in particular: Ch. Caron, *Les licences de logiciels dits
    “libres” à l'épreuve du droit d’auteur français*, Dalloz 2003 p.
    1556; M. Vivant, C. le Stanc, L. Rapp., M. Guibal et J-L. Bilon,
    *Lamy Droit de l’informatique et des réseaux*, Lamy 2010, n° 2942.

[^166]: TGI Paris, 28 March 2007, Educaffix c/ CNRS, Gaz. Pal., n° 22,
    22 January 2008, p. 35.

[^167]: M. Vivant, *La pratique de la gratuité en droit d’auteur*, RLDI
    mai 2010, n° 60 p. 59.

[^168]: See in particular: CA Versailles, 20 January 1987, D. 1988,
    somm. 207; Cass. Civ. 1ère, 23 January 2001, Comm. Com. Electr.
    2000, comm. n° 23.

[^169]: Cass. 1ère. Civ., 15 February 2005: Légipresse 2005, n° 211, I,
    p. 65.

[^170]: BSD licenses (*Berkeley software distribution license* allow all
    or part of a software subject to such a license to be used without
    restriction (in particular to be integrated into a free or owned
    software). In 1999, the BSD License was modified to remove a
    publicity clause requiring a copyright mention in all advertising or
    documentation supplied with the software.

[^171]: Cass. Civ. 1ère, 27 May 1986, Bull. Civ. 1986, I, n° 142.

[^172]: Cass. Civ 1ère, 15 May 2002, JurisData n° 2002-014336.

[^173]: Otherwise known as “GNU General Public License” or “Licence
    générale publique GNU”.

[^174]: Cass. 1ère civ., 28 January 2003, Bull. civ. I, n° 28.

[^175]: Cass. Com., 25 June 1991, Bull. Civ. IV, n° 234.

[^176]: Articles L. 132-1 and seq., and R. 132-1 and seq. of the
    Consumer Code.

[^177]: Law n °94-665 of 4 August 1994 concerning use of the French
    language.

[^178]: L. 121-16 and seq. of the Consumer Code.

[^179]: CA Paris, 16 September 2009, RG n° 01/24298, SA EDU 4 c/
    Association AFPA.

[^180]: P-Y. Gautier, *Propriété littéraire et artistique*, op. cit.

[^181]: Article R. 132-1, 6° of the Consumer Code.

[^182]: Articles 1386-1 and following of the Civil Code resulting from
    Law n° 98-389 of 19 May 1998 applying Community Directive n° 85-374
    of 25 July 1985 concerning the unification of legislative,
    regulatory and administrative provisions in Member States on
    liability for defective products.

[^183]: P. Oudot, *Le risque de développement. Contribution au maintien
    du droit à réparation*, thèse Dijon, 2005; Ph. Le Tourneau, *Droit
    de la responsabilité et des contrats*, Dalloz Action, 2009-2010.

[^184]: Article 9.1: “The Licensee acknowledges that the scientific and
    technical state-of-the-art when the Software was distributed did not
    enable all possible uses to be tested and verified, nor for the
    presence of possible defects to be detected. In this respect, the
    Licensee’s attention has been drawn to the risks associated with
    loading, using, modifying and/or developing and reproducing the
    Software which are reserved for experienced users”.

[^185]: TGI Paris, 28 March 2007, op. cit.

[^186]: Article 1142 of the Civil Code.

[^187]: Article 1184 of the Civil Code.

[^188]: Article 335-3 of the Intellectual Property Code.

[^189]: Gesetz über Urheberrecht und verwandte Schutzrechte
    (Urheberrechtsgesetz) of 9.9.1965, hereinafter referred to either as
    ‘Copyright Act’ or by its common German acronym ‘UrhG’.

[^190]: Council Directive 91/250/EEC of 14 May 1991 on the legal
    protection of computer programs, which was replaced by the Directive
    2009/24/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April
    2009 on the legal protection of computer programs; hereinafter
    referred to as the “Software Directive”.

[^191]: UrhG, sec. 69a para 4 reads as follows: “The provisions on
    literary works shall apply to computer programs where not otherwise
    provided in this Section.”

[^192]: The wording differs slightly from that used in UrhG, sec. 2 para
    2 where the general requirements for the protection of works are set
    forth. This provision reads as follows: “Personal intellectual
    creations alone shall constitute works within the meaning of this
    Law.”

[^193]: GRÜTZMACHER, in: Wandtke/Bullinger (ed.), Praxiskommentar zum
    Urheberrecht, 3rd ed., 2009 (hereinafter referred to as “UrhR”), §
    69a ref. 32.

[^194]: BGH (Bundesgerichtshof, hereinafter also referred to as “Federal
    Court of Justice”), 2005 GRUR (Gewerblicher Rechtsschutz und
    Urheberrecht) 860, 861 — Fash 2000, available at
    <http://www.jurpc.de/rechtspr/20050111.htm>; GRÜTZMACHER, in:
    Wandtke/Bullinger (ed.), UrhR, § 69 ref. 33; CZYCHOWSKI, in:
    Fromm/Nordemann (ed.), Urheberrecht, 10th ed., 2008 (hereinafter
    referred to as “UrhR”), § 69a ref. 18.

[^195]: BGH 2005 GRUR 860, 861 — Fash 2000, available at
    <http://www.jurpc.de/rechtspr/20050111.htm>; DREIER, in:
    Dreier/Schulze (ed.), Urheberrechtsgesetz, 4th ed., 2013
    (hereinafter referred to as “UrhG”), § 69a ref. 27; GRÜTZMACHER, in:
    Wandtke/Bullinger (ed.), UrhR, § 69a ref. 34.

[^196]: BGH 2005 GRUR 860, 861 — Fash 2000, available at
    <http://www.jurpc.de/rechtspr/20050111.htm>.

[^197]: See below the more detailed section on “Moral Rights”.

[^198]: The section on “Copyright” of the “Analysis of FOSS under German
    Law”.

[^199]: With or without consideration.

[^200]: See <http://www.efta.int/legal-texts/eea.aspx>.

[^201]: Of this opinion: OLG München, 2008 MMR (Multimedia und Recht)
    601; LG München I, 2007 MMR 328; OLG München, 2006 MMR 746; LG
    München I, 2006 MMR 175; HEYN/SCHMIDL, 2006 K&R (Kommunikation &
    Recht) 74, 76 f.; PAUL/PREUSS, 2008 K&R 526, 528; CZYCHOWSKI, in:
    Fromm/Nordemann, UrhR, § 69c ref. 33.

[^202]: LG Hamburg, 2006 MMR 827; OLG Hamburg, 2007 MMR 317; JAEGER, Der
    Erschöpfungsgrundsatz im neuen Urheberrecht, in: Hilty/Peukert
    (ed.), Interessenausgleich im Urheberrecht, 2004, p. 47, 58 f.;
    HOEREN, 2010 MMR 447; GRÜTZMACHER, in: Wandtke/Bullinger (ed.),
    UrhR, § 69c ref. 31.

[^203]: Case C-128/11 — UsedSoft GmbH v. Oracle International Corp,
    available at
    <http://curia.europa.eu/juris/celex.jsf?celex=62011CJ0128&lang1=en&type=TXT&ancre>=

[^204]: BGH, judgment of 17 July 2013, ref. I ZR 129/08, available at
    <http://openjur.de/u/638197.html>

[^205]: Therefore an EULA is not necessary for the end user to run a
    lawfully obtained software.

[^206]: CZYCHOWSKI, in: Fromm/Nordemann, UrhR, § 69d ref. 30; DREIER,
    in: Dreier/Schulze, UrhG, § 69d ref. 12; LOEWENHEIM, in:
    Schricker/Loewenheim, Urheberrecht (UrhR), § 69d ref. 13.

[^207]: These are delineated in sec. 69e para 1 through 3.

[^208]: See GRÜTZMACHER, in: Wandtke/Bullinger, UrhR, § 69a ref. 48.

[^209]: Full right of recognition of her authorship of the work (sec.
    13) but only a limited right to prohibit any distortion of her work
    (see sec. 14), DREIER, in: Dreier/Schulze (ed.), UrhG, § 69a ref.
    34.

[^210]: GRÜTZMACHER, in: Wandtke/Bullinger (ed.), UrhR, § 69a ref. 50; §
    69b ref. 40; before§§ 12 ff ref. 5 ff.

[^211]: GRÜtZMACHER, in: Wandtke/Bullinger (ed.), UrhR, § 69b ref. 40.

[^212]: GRÜTZMACHER, in: Wandtke/Bullinger (ed.), UrhR,§ 69a ref. 51; §
    13 ref. 10.

[^213]: GRÜTZMACHER, in: Wandtke/Bullinger (ed.), UrhR, § 69a ref. 51.

[^214]: In this context, it should be noted that German copyright law
    provides for a general right of authors to receive equitable
    remuneration for the rights granted, according to which the author
    may even require the licensee to amend the license agreement if the
    compensation is not sufficient, UrhG, sec. 32 . However, according
    to UrhG, sec. 32 para 3 sentence 3, authors may “grant a
    non-exclusive exploitation right without consideration to the world
    at large” (translation by A. Dietz, 2004 IIC 842, 844) so that
    authors that choose to put software under a FOSS license cannot rely
    on the rights otherwise awarded by UrhG, sec. 32. For details, see
    the explanation in “The Right to equitable remuneration and the
    so-called ‘Linux clause’”.

[^215]: Three ways of calculation of damages are accepted: actual
    damages, profits of the infringer, and the amount the infringer
    would have had to pay if he had entered into a license agreement
    with the right holder (UrhG, sec. 97 para 2 sentences 2 and 3).

[^216]: For further details see GRÜTZMACHER, in: Wandtke/Bullinger
    (ed.), UrhR, § 69f ref. 25 ff.

[^217]: See the statement of the ifrOSS that is available at
    <http://www.ifross.org/ifross_html/urhebervertragsrecht.pdf>.

[^218]: Translation by A. Dietz, 2004 IIC 842, 844.

[^219]: For a more detailed description of the legislative history see
    JAEGER/METZGER, Open Source Software, Rechtliche Rahmenbedingungen
    der Freien Software, 3rd ed., 2011 (hereinafter referred to as
    “OSS”), ref. 136.

[^220]: See the section on “Copyright Assignment” above.

[^221]: BGH, 2002 CR 249 — Wetterführungspläne II.

[^222]: JAEGER/METZGER, OSS, ref. 138; for a detailed discussion see
    GRÜTZMACHER, in: Wandtke/Bullinger (ed.), UrhR, § 69b ref. 23 f.

[^223]: JAEGER/METZGER, ref. 139. For more detail see GRÜTZMACHER, op.
    cit.

[^224]: JAEGER/METZGER, OSS, ref. 8.

[^225]: DREIER, in: Dreier/Schulze (ed.), UrhG, § 69c ref. 38; LG
    München I, 2004 MMR 693, 694; LG Frankfurt, 2006 CR 729, 731.

[^226]: DREIER, in: Dreier/Schulze (ed.), UrhG, § 69c ref. 38; LG
    München I, 2004 MMR 693, 694; LG Frankfurt, 2006 CR 729, 731.

[^227]: For computer programs see BGH, 1994 GRUR 39,
    40 — Buchhaltungsprogramm.

[^228]: THUM, in: Wandtke/Bullinger (ed.), UrhR, § 8 ref. 17; SCHULZE,
    in: Dreier/Schulze (ed.), UrhG, § 8 ref. 3.

[^229]: JAEGER/METZGER, OSS, ref. 145. Pursuant to UrhG, sec. 8 para 2
    sentence 2, “(h)owever, a joint author may not unreasonably refuse
    his consent to the publication, exploitation or alteration of the
    work.”

[^230]: LOEWENHEIM, in: Schricker/Loewenheim (ed.), Urheberrecht, 4th
    ed., 2010 (hereinafter referred to as “UrhR”), §8 ref. 20; DREIER,
    in: Dreier/Schulze (ed.), UrhG, §\~8 ref. 21.

[^231]: DREIER, in: Dreier/Schulze (ed.), UrhG, § 9 ref. 6.

[^232]: THUM, in: Wandtke/Bullinger (ed.), UrhR, § 9 ref. 12;
    LOEWENHEIM, in: Schricker/Loewenheim (ed.), UrhR, § 9 ref. 6, § 4
    ref. 21; DREIER, in: Dreier/Schulze (ed.), UrhR, § 4 ref. 5.

[^233]: LOEWENHEIM, in: Schricker/Lowenheim (ed.), UrhR, § 4 ref. 25;
    DREIER, in: Dreier/Schulze (ed.), UrhG, § 4 ref. 4.

[^234]: See § 3 para 3 of the Fiduciary Licence Agreement (FLA)
    published by the Free Software Foundation Europe, available at
    <http://www.fsfe.org/projects/ftf/fla.en.html>. For an in-depth
    analysis of different forms of copyright transactions and of
    drafting options for contribution agreements see ENGELHARDT,
    Drafting Options for Contributor Agreements for Free and Open Source
    Software: Assignment, (Non)Exclusive Licence and Legal Consequences.
    A Comparative Analysis of German and US Law, 2013 scripted 148,
    available at <http://script-ed.org/?p=1061>

[^235]: See “The right to equitable remuneration and the so-called
    ‘Linux clause’ section” above.

[^236]: JAEGER/METZGER, OSS, ref.129; see also DREIER, in:
    Dreier/Schulze (ed.), UrhG, § 69a ref. 34.

[^237]: Hereinafter referred to as ‘GPL’, its version number indicated
    by the addition of ‘v2’ or ‘v3’ respectively.

[^238]: See the “Enforcing FOSS licenses” section below.

[^239]: Contracts are defined as the declared agreement of two or more
    persons to achieve a certain legal effect. ELLENBERGER, in: Palandt,
    Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch, 74th ed., 2014, before §§ 145 ref. 1.
    Consideration is not a prerequisite for the classification as a
    contract.

[^240]: And the necessity of having this offer explains why it is
    crucial that every FOSS distributor attaches a copy of the license
    text.

[^241]: JAEGER/METZGER, OSS, ref. 177. If this were not seen as
    acceptance, the user would not obtain a license and would
    consequently infringe the copyrights in the software, if her use
    exceeded the boundaries of UrhG, sec. 69d.

[^242]: Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch, hereinafter referred to either as
    “Civil Code” or by its common German acronym “BGB”, available in
    English at <http://www.gesetze-im-internet.de/englisch_bgb/>.

[^243]: See LG Frankfurt, 2006 CR 729, 731; JAEGER/METZGER, OSS, ref.
    177; METZGER/JAEGER, Open Source Software und deutsches
    Urheberrecht, 1999 GRUR Int. 839, 843, available in English at
    <http://www.ifross.org/publikation/open-source-software-and-german-copyright-law>;
    SCHULZ, Dezentrale Softwareentwicklungs- und
    Softwarevermarktungskonzepte, 2005, ref 563 f.; MARLY,
    Praxishandbuch Softwarerecht, 5th ed., 2009, ref. 925; but see with
    counter-arguments mainly relying on the law on standard business
    terms SPINDLER, in: Spindler (ed.), Rechtsfragen bei Open Source,
    2004 (hereinafter referred to as “Open Source”), chapter C. ref. 49
    ff.

[^244]: LG Frankfurt, 2006 CR 729, 731; LG München I, 2004 MMR 693, 694;
    JAEGER/METZGER, OSS, ref. 179; MARLY, Praxishandbuch Softwarerecht,
    ref. 926.

[^245]: Translation available at
    <http://www.gesetze-im-internet.de/englisch_bgb/englisch_bgb.html#BGBengl_000P305>.

[^246]: A typical exception can be a software download where it is
    possible to condition the download on the express consent with the
    license text.

[^247]: METZGER, in: ifrOSS (ed.), Die GPL kommentiert und erklärt,
    Ziffern 11, 12, ref. 6, available at
    <http://www.ifross.org/en/Druckfassung/Die_GPL_kommentiert_und_erklaert.pdf>;
    JAEGER/METZGER, OSS, ref. 219 ff.

[^248]: JAEGER/METZGER, OSS, ref. 180; see the section on “Exceptions to
    exclusive rights” above.

[^249]: JAEGER/METZGER, OSS, ref. 180, 182; see also SCHULZ, Dezentrale
    Softwareentwicklungs- und Softwarevermarktungskonzepte, 2005, ref
    683 ff., with a detailed discussion of further arguments.

[^250]: JAEGER/METZGER, OSS, ref. 181; see BGH, 1983 NJW 1489.

[^251]: JAEGER/METZGER, OSS, ref. 220 f.; SPINDLER, in: Spindler (ed.),
    Open Source, C. ref. 14 ff., 22; METZGER, in: ifrOSS (ed.), GPL
    kommentiert, Ziffern 11, 12 ref. 6, available at
    <http://www.ifross.org/en/Druckfassung/Die_GPL_kommentiert_und_erklaert.pdf>.
    Besides the conflict with the rules on standard business terms, the
    exclusion of any liability, including for intentional acts, is
    declared non-effective by BGB sec. 276 para 3 even for individual
    contracts.

[^252]: See JAEGER/METZGER, OSS, ref. 334; HEATH, in: Spindler (ed.),
    Open Source, G. ref. 9 ff.; KOCH, Urheber- und kartellrechtliche
    Aspekte der Nutzung von Open-Source-Software, 2000 CR, 333, 343 f.;
    crit. CZYCHOWSKI, in: Fromm/Nordemann (ed.), UrhR, after § 69c ref.
    21 ff. See further the remarks on the cases Welte v. D-Link and
    Welte v. Skype in the case overview below.

[^253]: LG Frankfurt, 2006 CR 729, 731; see also LG München I, 1994 MMR
    693, 695.

[^254]: LG München I, 2004 MMR 693, 695; DREIER, in: Dreier/Schulze
    (ed.), UrhG, § 69c ref. 38; SPINDLER, in: Spindler (ed.), Open
    Source, C. ref. 35 ff.; JAEGER, in: ifrOSS (ed.), Die GPL
    kommentiert und erklärt, Ziffer 4, ref. 11 ff., available at
    <http://www.ifross.org/en/Druckfassung/Die_GPL_kommentiert_und_erklaert.pdf>.

[^255]: As in sec. 1 para 2 of the GPLv2.

[^256]: See sec. 4 para 2 of the GPLv3.

[^257]: See JAEGER/METZGER, OSS, ref. 222; METZGER/JAEGER, Open Source
    Software and Copyright Law, 2001 IIC 52, 71 f.

[^258]: The two claims listed last require that the distributor acted at
    least negligently.

[^259]: See sec. 1 para 2 of the GPLv2 which expressly allows licensees
    to provide their own warranties.

[^260]: But note that the rights holder might still be liable under
    product liability laws, see below.

[^261]: METZGER, in: ifrOSS (ed.), Die GPL kommentiert und erklärt,
    Ziffern 11, 12, ref. 26, available at
    <http://www.ifross.org/en/Druckfassung/Die_GPL_kommentiert_und_erklaert.pdf>.

[^262]: Regulation (EC) No. 593/2008 of the European Parliament and of
    the Council of 17 June 2008 on the law applicable to contractual
    obligations (Rome I), OJ of 4.7.2008, L 177/6, available at
    <http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2008:177:0006:01:en:HTML>.

[^263]: Gesetz über die Haftung für fehlerhafte Produkte
    (Produkthaftungsgesetz — ProdHaftG) of 15.12.1989 (BGBl. I 2198).

[^264]: 93 BGHZ 23, 29.

[^265]: JAEGER/METZGER, OSS, ref. 233.

[^266]: The Federal Court of Justice, for instance, left the question
    unanswered in the important Programmfehlerbeseitigung decision, BGH,
    2000 GRUR 866, 868.

[^267]: JAEGER, Kommerzielle Applikationen für Open Source Software und
    deutsches Urheberrecht, in: Hoffmann/Leible (ed.), Vernetztes
    Rechnen --- Softwarepatente — Web 2.0, 2008, p. 61, 74 f., available
    at
    <http://www.ifross.de/ifross_html/HoffmannLeible_Beitrag%20Jaeger.pdf>,
    but with two reservations: if the licensee herself creates the
    interface in the original program, and if modifications of the
    original work are necessary to enable the new module to work with
    the original program.

[^268]: See in more detail id., p. 77.

[^269]: Id., p. 77.

[^270]: See below [section\_title](#sec_fosscasesgerman).

[^271]: For further details see the section below on “Courses of
    action”.

[^272]: See also the section on “Special measures” above.

[^273]: WILD, in: Schricker/Loewenheim (ed.), UrhR, § 97 ref. 138.

[^274]: See below the case FreeAdhocUDF, LG Bochum, judgment of 20
    January 2011, ref. I-8 O 293/09, in parts available in German at
    <http://www.telemedicus.info/urteile/Urheberrecht/Open-Source/1148-LG-Bochum-Az-I-8-O-29309-Ansprueche-bei-Verletzung-der-LGPL.html>.

[^275]: However, it is not required that all authors become a party to
    the action itself.

[^276]: JAEGER/METZGER, OSS, ref. 167.

[^277]: According to sec. 93 of the German Civil Procedure Code, the
    defendant can acknowledge the rights of the plaintiff and does not
    have to bear the costs of the action provided that she has not given
    reason to sue.

[^278]: It should be noted that the defendant can ask the court in the
    preliminary proceedings to require the plaintiff to file for a
    regular action. If the plaintiff does not follow this order, or if
    the main proceedings show that the defendant had not infringed on
    the plaintiff’s rights, the preliminary injunction is annulled.

[^279]: In which case the order issued does not contain a written
    explanation of the reasons the court built its decision on.

[^280]: The opponent can file an objection to have the case remanded. If
    the applicant has provided the court with incorrect facts in order
    to obtain a preliminary injunction, she risks being ordered to pay
    damages according to sec. 945 ZPO (Zivilprozessordnung — Code of
    Civil Procedure).

[^281]: Called the Abschlussschreiben (conclusion letter) and
    Abschlusserklärung (conclusion declaration). The defendant in
    particular must make the legally binding promise to refrain from
    appealing the decision in any way.

[^282]: See <http://www.gesetze-im-internet.de/rvg/>.

[^283]: JAEGER, Enforcement of the GNU GPL in Germany and Europe, 1
    (2010) JIPITEC 34, para. 15, available at
    <http://www.jipitec.eu/issues/jipitec-1-1-2010/2419/dippadm1268746871.43.pdf>.

[^284]: LG München I, 2004 MMR 693; available at
    <http://www.jbb.de/fileadmin/download/urteil_lg_muenchen_gpl.pdf>
    and as an English translation at
    <http://www.jbb.de/fileadmin/download/judgment_dc_munich_gpl.pdf>.
    See HÖPPNER, The GPL prevails: An analysis of the first-ever Court
    decision on the validity and effectivity of the GPL, available at
    <http://www.law.ed.ac.uk/ahrc/script-ed/issue4/GPL-case.asp>.

[^285]: LG München 2004 MMR 693, 694,
    <http://www.jbb.de/fileadmin/download/judgment_dc_munich_gpl.pdf>.

[^286]: Id., at 695.

[^287]: Id., at 694 f.

[^288]: Id., at 695.

[^289]: LG Frankfurt, 2006 CR 729; available at
    <http://www.jbb.de/fileadmin/download/urteil_lg_frankfurt_gpl.pdf>
    and
    <http://www.jbb.de/fileadmin/download/judgment_dc_frankfurt_gpl.pdf>
    (English translation).

[^290]: LG Frankfurt, 2006 CR 729, 731.

[^291]: See art. 4 para 2 of the Software Directive.

[^292]: LG Frankfurt, 2006 CR 729, 732.

[^293]: LG Frankfurt, 2006 CR 729, 732.

[^294]: LG München I, 2008 CR 57; available at
    <http://www.ifross.org/Fremdartikel/LGMuenchenUrteil.pdf>.

[^295]: The reasoning being that if SMC Networks were permitted to
    distribute the product, there would not have been room for
    contributory liability of Skype.

[^296]: To date, it remained the only GPL case in Germany that was
    appealed, JAEGER, Enforcement of the GNU GPL in Germany and Europe,
    1 (2010) JIPITEC 34, para. 22.

[^297]: LG Bochum, judgment of 20 January 2011, ref. I-8 O 293/09, in
    parts available in German at
    <http://www.telemedicus.info/urteile/Urheberrecht/Open-Source/1148-LG-Bochum-Az-I-8-O-29309-Ansprueche-bei-Verletzung-der-LGPL.html>.

[^298]: LG Berlin, 2012 CR 152, available at
    <http://www.ifross.org/en/publikation/lg-berlin-az-16-o-25510>.

[^299]: More on the facts of the case can be found at
    <https://fsfe.org/news/2011/news-20111110-01.en.html> and
    <https://fsfe.org/news/2011/news-20111201-02.en.html>.

[^300]: KREUTZER, 2012 CR 145-152

[^301]: LG Hamburg, 2013 CR 498, available at
    <http://www.ifross.org/en/publikation/lg-hamburg-az-308-o-1013>.

[^302]: OLG Düsseldorf, 2011 CR 285, available at
    <http://www.ifross.org/en/publikation/olg-duesseldorf-az-i-20-u-4109>.

[^303]: OLG Düsseldorf, 2012 CR 434, available at
    <http://www.ifross.org/en/publikation/olg-d-sseldorf-az-1-20-u-17611>;
    an English translation is available at
    <http://germanitlaw.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/Higher-Regional-Court-Duesseldorf.pdf>.

[^304]: See section 5(3) of t he German Trade Mark Act (Markengesetz):
    “Titles of works are the names or special designations of printed
    publications, cinematic works, music works, stage works or other
    comparable works.” Translation by Brian Duffett and Neil Mussett,
    available at
    <http://www.gesetze-im-internet.de/englisch_markeng/englisch_markeng.html#p0032>.

[^305]: BGH 2000 GRUR, 882, available at
    <http://juris.bundesgerichtshof.de/cgi-bin/rechtsprechung/document.py?Gericht=bgh&Art=en&sid=0da4d51abc69d99e14780ba42ee1d8ad&nr=22449>.

[^306]: LG Berlin, Order of 21 February 2006, ref. 16 O 134/06,
    available at
    <http://www.ifross.org/Fremdartikel/LG%20Berlin%20GPL-Entscheidung21.2.06.pdf>.

[^307]: The Copyright Act of 1911 and the Copyright Ordinance of 1924
    continue in certain circumstances to apply to works and acts of
    infringement that predate the Copyright Law.

[^308]: Israel is a signatory to the WIPO Copyright Treaty, but has yet
    to ratify the treaty or introduce implementing legislation. Several
    provisions of the WCT, however, have been implemented in the
    Copyright Law. Other provisions, such as the requirement of
    contracting states to provide for legal remedies against the
    circumvention of effective technological measures, have not yet been
    adopted into Israeli law. See below under the heading “Technical
    Devices and Effective Technological Measures”.

[^309]: See paragraphs 15-16 of the dissenting opinion of Justice
    Englard in IE 1567/99 Sivan v. Shefer, discussing the English and
    American approaches and their application to Israeli law. See also
    IE 5365/11 AKUM Ltd. v EMI Music Publishing Ltd. (suggesting, but
    not holding, that the proper intepretation of the rights of joint
    owners under Israeli copyright law should be determined by reference
    to Section 31(A)(1) of the Real Property Law, which provides that
    joint owners in property can each make reasonable use of the
    property without the permission of the other owners, as long as that
    use does not interfere with the rights of other owners.)

[^310]: TONY GREENMAN, ZEHUYOT YOZRIM, “Copyright”, 2nd ed. 2008
    (hereinafter GREENMAN), at 212.

[^311]: This article does not address the question of whether the GPL
    may potentially reach beyond the statutory definition of a
    “derivative work”. The answer to that question depends on the
    contractual validity and interpretation of the GPL.

[^312]: 1 GREENMAN, at 265.

[^313]: The Copyright Law enumerates other “permitted uses” which are
    not applicable or not specific to computer programs, including the
    doctrine of “fair use”. These “permitted uses” are beyond the scope
    of this chapter.

[^314]: See the Proposed Copyright Law, 196 Reshumot 1116 (July 20,
    2005), at 1127.

[^315]: See, e.g., Sections 12 (requiring parties to act in good faith
    in contractual negotiations), and 39 (requiring good faith in
    satisfying contractual terms and obligations) of the Contract Law of
    1973.

[^316]: The Free Software Foundation has taken the position that the GPL
    is a license but not a contract. See
    <http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/enforcing-gpl.html>. This position
    seems to be motivated by an attempt to circumvent the legal
    requirements of contract formation, such as the elements of offer
    and assent. However, many commentators have asserted that this
    position is not an accurate description of the law. See HEATHER J.
    MEEKER, THE OPEN SOURCE ALTERNATIVE (2008) at 225. In addition, it
    is unclear under Israeli law whether a license cannot be a contract.
    See generally 2 GREENMAN, at 555 (describing a license as a
    contract) and 568 (describing the GPL and open source licenses as
    enforceable legal contracts). The question of whether the GPL is a
    contract or license may take on more signifigance in Israel, where
    specific performance can be available as remedy for breach of
    contract. This is discussed is more detail below in the context of
    contractual remedies for the breach of the GPL. In any event, the
    position taken by the Free Software Foundation need not be the
    stance of all licensors of FOSS, whether made available under the
    GPL or pursuant to other FOSS licenses.

[^317]: This approach is cogently and succinctly expressed by section 5
    of version 2.1 of the GPL: “You are not required to accept this
    License, since you have not signed it. However, nothing else grants
    you permission to modify or distribute the Program or its derivative
    works. These actions are prohibited by law if you do not accept this
    License. Therefore, by modifying or distributing the Program (or any
    work based on the Program), you indicate your acceptance of this
    License to do so, and all its terms and conditions for copying,
    distributing or modifying the Program or works based on it.” See
    also Section 9 of version 3.0 of the GPL.

[^318]: GABRIELA SHALEV, DINEI HOZIM, “Laws of Contracts” at 608 (1990)
    (hereinafter SHALEV). Together with this acceptance of “standardized
    contracts” as generally valid, Israeli law limits the efficacy of
    “unconscionable” terms in such contracts. See the discussion below
    under the heading “Waiver and Liability”.

[^319]: See also 2 GREENMAN, at 568 (describing the GPL and open source
    licenses as enforceable legal contracts). Note that the question of
    whether a FOSS license is a contract or not should not affect the
    rights in bankruptcy. Section 123 of the Bankruptcy Ordinance -
    1980, which provides for the continued use of copyrights by a
    licensee in bankruptcy so long as royalties continue to be paid,
    does not distinguish between contractual or other rights in
    intellectual property.

[^320]: As noted, the FOSS license is the only authorization a defendant
    may have to use the FOSS work. As such, defendants may have little
    incentive to challenge the validity of the license. The defendants
    in Reuveni, for example, did not attack the contractual validity of
    the Creative Commons license. This may not be true, however, with
    regard to FOSS licenses that impose affirmative obligations on
    licensees, such as the requirements of the GPL with regard to the
    disclosure of source code.

[^321]: 2 GREENMAN, at 555.

[^322]: See Section 4(a) of the Sale Law. See also EYAL ZAMIR, HOK
    HAMEHER, “The Sale Law of 1968” (1987) (hereinafter ZAMIR), at 138.

[^323]: ZAMIR, at 379.

[^324]: The remedies of actual damages and an accounting of profits are
    implied by the Copyright Law, though not expressly provided for
    therein. Section 52 of the Copyright Law provides that the
    infringement of a copyright is cause for a civil action for damages,
    and case law has held that plaintiffs are entitled to an accounting
    of profits or actual damages. See, e.g. , 23/81 Hershko v. Orbach
    (1988) and 241/55 Neographica Printing vs. Masada (1957). Actual
    damages, as used herein, includes possible damages for the “theft”
    of the copyright as well as indirect damages. A discussion of the
    method of calculation of actual damages for copyright infringement
    under Israeli law is beyond the scope of this article. Regarding the
    remedy of an accounting of profits, see 2 GREENMAN, at 790.

[^325]: The questions raised by an accounting of profits did not come up
    in Reuveni, as the defendant in that case did not collect any actual
    profits from the sale of the infringing work. See Reuveni at pp.4.

[^326]: Generally, in determining whether to grant a temporary
    injunction, a court will weigh the “balance of the hardships” – the
    damage to the plaintiff if the request for temporary relief is
    rejected against the damage to the plaintiff (or other parties) if
    the request is granted. Prior to the adoption of the Copyright Law
    in 2007, the Supreme Court opined that a temporary injunction for
    the infringement of copyright “should be granted immediately once
    the copyright holder has succeeded in proving that its rights have
    been infringed.” See RAA 67141/02 Akum Ltd. vs. Galie Tzahal (2003).
    Even so, the subsequently-adopted section 53 of the Copyright Law
    might be interpreted as granting courts more discretion in
    determining whether to award a temporary injunction.

[^327]: See SHALEV, at 527, n. 1.

[^328]: L. C. UBERTAZZI, 'Diritto d’autore, estratto da Commentario
    breve alle leggi sulla Proprietà' Intellettuale e Concorrenza, 4th
    Edition, CEDAM, Milano, 2007, pp. 62-63

[^329]: Italian Copyright Law, Art. 25 and 32-ter of the Italian
    Copyright Law

[^330]: Such as software developed by employees (Italian Copyright Law,
    Art. 12 bis), and software developed for hire under a contractual
    transfer of copyrights

[^331]: “Indivisible works” are governed by art. 10 of the Italian
    Copyright law, which makes extensive reference to the rules of the
    *“Comunione”* (shared ownership), Art. 1100 onwards of the Italian
    Civil Code

[^332]: Art. 1106 of the Italian Civil Code

[^333]: Article 1109 of the Italian Civil Code

[^334]: Case Welte vs. Skype Technologies SA (Germany) reported inter
    alia by Groklaw
    (<http://www.groklaw.net/article.php?story=20080508212535665>)

[^335]: On this we have a precise opinion, see C. PIANA, *Licenze
    pubbliche di software e contratto*, I Contratti, IPSOA, Milan, 2006,
    p. 720-727, also available for download at
    <http://www.piana.eu/repository/720_727.pdf>

[^336]: Cfr. GPL v.3, Section 11

[^337]: See e.g., the BSD license
    (<http://www.opensource.org/licenses/bsd-license>): THIS SOFTWARE IS
    PROVIDED BY &lt;copyright holder&gt; *'AS IS*' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
    IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
    WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
    ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL &lt;copyright holder&gt; BE LIABLE
    FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
    CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
    SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR
    BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF
    LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING
    NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS
    SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

[^338]: B. PERENS, “The Open Source Definition”,
    <http://perens.com/OSD.html>

[^339]: As provided for by Art. 798 of the Italian Civil Code for
    defects of the thing which was donated, which stipulates that
    without an express pact the liability only arises from a willful
    act.

[^340]: Neither the principles (freedoms) of the Free Software movement,
    nor the Open Source Definition mandate the copyleft clause. Several
    FOSS licenses do not contain a copyleft clause. Examples hereof are
    the Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD) license and the Apache
    license

[^341]: E.g., GPL version 3 Art. 5 stipulates: “You must license the
    entire work, as a whole, under this License to anyone who comes into
    possession of a copy. This License will therefore apply, along with
    any applicable section 7 additional terms, to the whole of the work,
    and all its parts, regardless of how they are packaged. This License
    gives no permission to license the work in any other way, but it
    does not invalidate such permission if you have separately received
    it” GPL version 2 Art. 2 b stipulates: “You must cause any work that
    you distribute or publish, that in whole or in part contains or is
    derived from the Program or any part thereof, to be licensed as a
    whole at no charge to all third parties under the terms of this
    License”.

[^342]: See R. STALLMAN, *On Selling Exceptions to the GNU GPL*, FSF
    website, available at
    <http://www.fsf.org/blogs/rms/selling-exceptions>

[^343]: See e.g. C., DIBONA, D., COOPER and M., STONE, “Introduction”,
    in *Open Sources 2.0: The Continuing Evolution* (Ed. C., DiBona, D.,
    Cooper and M., Stone), O’Reilly, 2006, p. XXV-XL.

[^344]: Add-ons are additions to the free work to which the author
    reserves all rights, and which can only be used against payment

[^345]: See e.g. M., OLSON, “Dual Licensing”, in *Open Sources 2.0: The
    Continuing Evolution* (Ed. C., DiBona, D., Cooper and M., Stone),
    O’Reilly, 2006, p. 35

[^346]: Dlgs 85/2005 “Codice dell’Amministrazione Digitale”

[^347]: Art. 69 CAD

[^348]: See Aliprandi, Simone and Piana, Carlo (2013) *FOSS in the
    Italian public administration: fundamental law principles*,
    *International Free and Open Source Software Law Review*, 5(1), pp
    43 – 50 DOI: 10.5033/ifosslr.v5i1.84, available at
    <http://www.ifosslr.org/ifosslr/article/view/84>

[^349]: However, the effectiveness of this measure can be fully
    ascertained with an in-field survey after a period of time, as many
    of similar laws have been largely disregarded, absent clear
    compliant enforcement measures

[^350]: Art. 156 ter of the Italian Copyright Law

[^351]: Korean Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism and Korea
    Copyright Commission. Guide on Amendments to the Korean Copyright
    Act. Seoul: Korean Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism and Korea
    Copyright Commission, 2009. 17. Print.

[^352]: Copyright Act Article 2 (16).

[^353]: Song, Young Sik, et al. Copyright Acts . 2 vols. Seoul: Yook Bub
    Sa, 2013. 659-660. Print.

[^354]: Supreme Court 94Do2238 dated November14, 1995.

[^355]: Copyright Act, Article 101-2.

[^356]: Copyright Act, Article 2 (2).

[^357]: Copyright Act, Article 10(1).

[^358]: Copyright Act, Article 10(2).

[^359]: Korea Copyright Commission. 100 Consultation Cases in Relation
    to the Revised Copyright Acts. Seoul: Korea Copyright Commission,
    2012. 60. Print.

[^360]: Copyright Act, Article 2(31).

[^361]: Korea Copyright Commission. 100 Consultation Cases in Relation
    to the Revised Copyright Acts. Seoul: Korea Copyright Commission,
    2012. 60. Print.

[^362]: Korean Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism, and Korea
    Copyright Commission. Guide on Amendments to the Korean Copyright
    Act. Seoul: Korean Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism and Korea
    Copyright Commission, 2009. 22. Print.

[^363]: Copyright Act, Article 9.

[^364]: The Korean Civil Act, Article 664.

[^365]: Supreme Court 98Da60590 dated November 10, 2000.

[^366]: Copyright Act, Article 48(1).

[^367]: Copyright Act, article 15(2)(3), 48(4).

[^368]: Copyright Act, Article 48(2).

[^369]: Copyright Act, Article 16.

[^370]: Copyright Act, Article 18.

[^371]: Copyright Act, Article 20.

[^372]: Copyright Act, Article 21.

[^373]: Copyright Act, Article 22.

[^374]: Seoul High Court 2003Na21140 dated January 12, 2005.

[^375]: Korean Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism and Korea
    Copyright Commission. Guide on Amendments to the Korean Copyright
    Act. Seoul: Korean Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism and Korea
    Copyright Commission, 2009. 34. Print.

[^376]: Copyright Act, Article 35-2.

[^377]: Copyright Act, Article 101-3(1)6.

[^378]: Copyright Act, Article 2(34).

[^379]: Copyright Act, Article 101-4.

[^380]: Copyright Act, Article 20.

[^381]: Copyright Act, Article 14(1).

[^382]: Supreme Court 94Ma2217 dated October 2, 1995.

[^383]: Copyright Act, Article 136(2)1.

[^384]: Supreme Court 92Da31309 dated December 24, 1992.

[^385]: Copyright Act, Article 13(2) 4, 5.

[^386]: Copyright Act, Article 11(2).

[^387]: Copyright Act, Article 11(4).

[^388]: Copyright Act, Article 39(1).

[^389]: Copyright Act, Article 41.

[^390]: Copyright Act, Article 40.

[^391]: Copyright Act, Article 39(2).

[^392]: Copyright Act, Article 44.

[^393]: Copyright Act, Article 45(1).

[^394]: Copyright Act, Article 45(2).

[^395]: Copyright Act, article 46(1).

[^396]: Supreme Court 95Da29130 dated July 30, 1996.

[^397]: Seoul High Court 98GaHap83680 dated July 23, 1999.

[^398]: Copyright Act, Article 14(1).

[^399]: Seoul High Court 95Na41279 dated July 12, 1996.

[^400]: Oh, Seung Jong. Copyright Act. Seoul: Park Young Sa, 2013. 1414.
    Print.

[^401]: Copyright Act, Article 123.

[^402]: Article 123 of the Act

[^403]: Copyright Act, Article 125.

[^404]: Seoul High Court 83Na4449 dated November 28, 1984.

[^405]: Copyright Act, Article 125-2.

[^406]: Supreme Court 98Da41216 dated May 25, 1999.

[^407]: Supreme Court 89Daka12824 dated October 24, 1989.

[^408]: Copyright Act, Article 127.

[^409]: Copyright Act, Article 128.

[^410]: Supreme Court 98Da41216 decided May 25, 1999.

[^411]: Supreme Court 2002Da45895 dated September 24, 2004.

[^412]: Copyright Act, Article 140.

[^413]: Supreme Court 2003Da47782 dated 9 September, 2005.

[^414]: Supreme Court 2002Da45895 dated September 24, 2004.

[^415]: Supreme Court 2006Do8369 February 12, 2009.

[^416]: Korea Copyright Commission, 100 Consultation Cases in Relation
    to the Revised Copyright Acts, Seoul: Korea Copyright Commission,
    2012, 60. Print.

[^417]: Choi, Young Ro. “Issues on Applying Open Source Software on
    Korean Contract Law” (for Working Group of Revitalization of Open
    Source Software organized by Communication of Korea(abolished) and
    Korea IT Industry Promotion Agency and Ministry of Information). GNU
    Korea, 2002. 4-6. Web. 1 July 2013
    <http://korea.gnu.org/people/chsong/copyleft/osl.pdf>.

[^418]: Choi, Young Ro. “Issues on Applying Open Source Software on
    Korean Contract Law” (for Working Group of Revitalization of Open
    Source Software organized by Communication of Korea(abolished) and
    Korea IT Industry Promotion Agency and Ministry of Information). GNU
    Korea, 2002. 5. Web. 1 July 2013
    <http://korea.gnu.org/people/chsong/copyleft/osl.pdf>.

[^419]: National IT Industry Promotion Agency, Study on Open Software
    License: On its Legal Issues and Foreign Policies. Seoul: Software
    Engineering Center, 2002. 48.

[^420]: National IT Industry Promotion Agency, Study on Open Software
    License: Standard License Agreement for Government developed Open
    Source Software, Seoul: Software Engineering Center, 2003, 74.
    Print.

[^421]: Supreme Court 2003Da41463 dated December 8, 2005.

[^422]: The Korean Civil Act, Article 532.

[^423]: National IT Industry Promotion Agency(Software Engineering
    Center). Study on Open Software License: Standard License Agreement
    for Government developed Open Source Software, National IT Industry
    Promotion Agency(Software Engineering Center), 2003. 74. Print.

[^424]: Kim, Byung Il. “GPL and Conflict of Laws”, Study on Conflict
    Laws 14 (2008): 93. Print.

[^425]: The Act on the Regulation of Terms and Conditions, Article 2.

[^426]: National IT Industry Promotion Agency(Software Engineering
    Center). Study on Open Software License: On its Legal Issues and
    Foreign Policies. Seoul: National IT Industry Promotion Agency
    (Software Engineering Center), 2002. 58-59. Print.

[^427]: Under German law, it is called ‘Standard Business Terms.’

[^428]: The Act on the Regulation of Terms and Conditions, Article 7.

[^429]: National IT Industry Promotion Agency(Software Engineering
    Center). Study on Open Software License: On its Legal Issues and
    Foreign Policies. Seoul: National IT Industry Promotion Agency
    (Software Engineering Center), 2002. 59-60. Print.

[^430]: Association of Comparative Private Law, Study on Amendments to
    the Product Liability Act, Seoul: Ministry of Justice of Korea,
    2012. 59. Print.

[^431]: The Product Liability Act, Article 2(2).

[^432]: The Product Liability Act, Article 6.

[^433]: The Product Liability Act, Article 2(3)a.

[^434]: Choi, Young Ro. “Issues on Applying Open Source Software on
    Korean Contract Law” (for Working Group of Revitalization of Open
    Source Software organized by Communication of Korea(abolished) and
    Korea IT Industry Promotion Agency and Ministry of Information). GNU
    Korea, 2002. 10. Web. 1 July 2013
    <http://korea.gnu.org/people/chsong/copyleft/osl.pdf>.

[^435]: Supreme Court 2006Do8369 dated February, 12 2009.

[^436]: Supreme Court 2006Do8369 dated February, 12 2009.

[^437]: Seoul Central District Court 2005No3002 dated November, 1 2006.

[^438]: The Korean Civil Act, Article 389.

[^439]: The Korean Civil Act, Article 543.

[^440]: The Korean Civil Act, Article 543, 544.

[^441]: The Korean Civil Act, Article 551.

[^442]: Supreme Court 95Da24528 dated February, 13 1998.

[^443]: Seoul Central District Court 2005No3002 dated November, 1 2006.

[^444]: Pack, Kwang Min and Hae Sung Yoon. “Examination of Trade Secret
    concept in Unfair Competition Prevention and Trade Secret Protection
    Act” Sungkyunkwan Legal Study 18.1 (2006): 4. Print.

[^445]: Act of 7 June 1994, Stb. 1994, no. 521.

[^446]: Council Directive 91/250/EEC of 14 May 1991 on the legal
    protection of computer programs, OJ L 122 17 May 1991, p. 42.

[^447]: Art. 1 para 1 Software Directive states that “Member States
    shall protect computer programs, by copyright, as literary works
    within the meaning of the Berne Convention for the Protection of
    Literary and Artistic Works”.

[^448]: According to the Explanatory Memorandum TK 1991-1992, 22 531,
    no. 3, all forms of computer programs, such as object code or
    executable code, source code, disks, tapes, firmware, embedded
    software et cetera, are protected. However, the District Court of
    Amsterdam held that the user interface of a computer program is not
    an independent copyright protected work, but forms an integral part
    of the computer program itself: President District Court (“Rb”)
    Amsterdam 18 November 1993, Computerrecht 1994, p. 129 with
    annotation by Meijboom. The District Court of Utrecht considered
    midi-files as computer programs under the Copyright Act, as well as
    phonograms under the Neighbouring Rights Act: Rb. Utrecht 7 May
    1997, Computerrecht 1998, p. 259.

[^449]: Art. 1 para 1 Software Directive states that “the term
    ‘\`computer programs” shall include their preparatory design
    material’'. Preparatory design materials include functional designs,
    technical designs, flow charts, data models et cetera, see: Van
    Schelven & Struik 1995, Softwarerecht, p. 27 ff.

[^450]: According to the preamble of the Software Directive, the term
    “computer program” includes “programs in any form, including those
    which are incorporated into hardware; whereas this term also
    includes preparatory design work leading to the development of a
    computer program provided that the nature of the preparatory work is
    such that a computer program can result from it at a later stage”.
    The function of a computer program “is to communicate and work
    together with other components of a computer system and with users
    and, for this purpose, a logical and, where appropriate, physical
    interconnection and interaction is required to permit all elements
    of software and hardware to work with other software and hardware
    and with users in all ways in which they are intended to function”.

[^451]: Preamble and Art. 1 para 2 Software Directive. Moreover the
    preamble states that “in accordance with this principle of
    copyright, to the extent that logic, algorithms and programming
    languages comprise ideas and principles, those ideas and principles
    are not protected under this Directive”, nevertheless “the
    expression of those ideas and principles is to be protected by
    copyright”.

[^452]: “een eigen, oorspronkelijk karakter bezit en het persoonlijk
    stempel van de maker draagt”, Supreme Court of the Netherlands
    (“HR”) 4 January 1991, NJ 1991, 608, AMI 1991, p. 177 (Van Dale v
    Romme).

[^453]: This excludes, at minimum, everything that has a form that is so
    banal or trivial, that one cannot designate any creative work of any
    kind behind such form: HR 30 May 2008, ECLI:NL:HR:2008:BC2153 and
    Hof The Hague 16 July 2013, ECLI:NL:GHDHA:2013:2477 (Endstra v Nieuw
    Amsterdam).

[^454]: HR 16 June 2006, NJ 2006, 585, ECLI:NL:HR:2006:AU8940 (Lancôme v
    Kecofa), HR 24 February 2006, NJ 2007, 37 (Technip v Goossens),
    ECLI:NL:PHR:2006:AU7508. Recently: HR 22 February 2013,
    ECLI:NL:HR:2013:BY1532. According to the Software Directive “no
    tests as to the qualitative or aesthetic merits of the program
    should be applied”\~ “in respect of the criteria to be applied in
    determining whether or not a computer program is an original work”.

[^455]: Compare: D.W.F. Verkade, Intellectuele eigendom, in Franken
    (Ed.), Recht en computer, 3rd edition, Deventer: Kluwer 1997.

[^456]: Amendments to the Copyright Act in connection with the abolition
    of protection of writings without original character or personal
    stamp of the author: "33 800 Wijziging van de Auteurswet in verband
    met de afschaffing van bescherming van geschriften zonder
    oorspronkelijk karakter of persoonlijk stempel van de maker". See
    also: HR 17 January 2014,ECLI:NL:HR:2014:88 (Ryanair v PR Aviation)

[^457]: Only provable derivation can be forbidden: See for instance HR
    27 January 1961, NJ 1962, 255 (Explicator) and HR 25 June 1965, NJ
    1966, 115 and 116 (Televizier).

[^458]: Schedules, theatre programmes, catalogues, telephone
    directories, broadcasting data and other data sets that do not have
    an original character and that are intended to be made public are
    subject to the protection of writings: HR 8 February 2002, 2002,
    515, ECLI:NL:HR:2002:AD6093 (EP Controls v GEC).

[^459]: See: A. Meijboom, Recht en Informatietechnologie, 7.3.2.3, p.
    11, September 1999.

[^460]: According to Article 2 para 1 of the Software Directive “the
    author of a computer program shall be the natural person or group of
    natural persons who has created the program or, where the
    legislation of the Member State permits, the legal person designated
    as the rights holder by that legislation”. If the “computer program
    is created by a group of natural persons jointly, the exclusive
    rights shall be owned jointly”, according to Article 2 para 2 of the
    Software Directive.

[^461]: As a consequence, if a one-man business is to be converted into
    a legal entity such as a private company with limited liability, the
    one-man business has to assign its copyrights to the successive
    legal entity. See: Rb. Den Bosch 26 April 1996 and Court of Appeal
    (“Hof”) Den Bosch 8 September 1997, Computerrecht 1998, p. 67, with
    annotation by Thole (Stuve v Hanekroot).

[^462]: A copyright notice does not qualify, in principle, as
    presumptive evidence of authorship. The purpose of a copyright
    notice is to provide security for copyright or certain rights in
    countries that are not party to the Berne Convention or TRIPS, but
    are party to the Universal Copyright Convention. See: A. Meijboom,
    Recht en Informatietechnologie, SDU: The Hague 1999, 7.3.2. p. 13
    and Verkade, Intellectuele Eigendom, Tekst & Commentaar Article 4,
    annotation 2, Deventer: Kluwer 2009. Nevertheless, the Dutch court
    can derive presumptive evidence of the copyright notice, if another
    name is mentioned on the software, on the basis of Article 177 Dutch
    Code of Civil Procedure and eventual Article 4 of the Copyright Act.
    See: Sub-district Court (“Ktr.”) Alkmaar 20 July 1998, AMI 1999, p.
    32. See also: Rb. Gelderland, 17 May 2013, FAWBG,
    ECLI:NL:RBGEL:2013:1367

[^463]: See HR 25 March 1949, NJ 1950, 643, with annotation by DJV, and
    J.H. Spoor & D.W.F. Verkade & D.J.G. Visser, Auteursrecht, naburige
    rechten en databankenrecht, Kluwer: Deventer: 2005. For instance,
    separate (graphic) user interfaces (but: compare Pres. Rb. Amsterdam
    18 November 1993, Computerrecht 1994, p. 129, with annotation by
    Meijboom), source codes and/or sounds.

[^464]: Besides that, Article 3:166 ff. of the Dutch Civil Code applies
    to the joint copyright as well, unless agreed otherwise. If one has
    developed software in joint ventures that are not a legal entity,
    such as a general partnership (“Vennootschap onder Firma”) or
    commercial partnership (“Maatschap”), problems may arise after the
    rescission of the joint venture, if no arrangement is made
    concerning the rights related to the jointly developed software. See
    for instance Rb. Amsterdam 18 November 1993, Computerrecht 1994, p.
    129 with annotation by Meijboom.

[^465]: See: Hof 's-Hertogenbosch 25 May 1994, AMI 1996, p. 116, with
    annotation by Grosheide (rijbewijsboeken).

[^466]: A. Meijboom, Recht en Informatietechnologie, SDU: Den Haag 1999,
    7.3.2. p. 13, and P.C. Van Schelven & H. Struik, Softwarerecht,
    Deventer: Kluwer 1995, pp. 46-47.

[^467]: Thus, the employee should have the task of developing software.
    This means, on the one hand, that if an accountant develops a
    computer program — during his spare time or not — then this employee
    does not lose his copyright to his employer, because his task is not
    to develop software. See: Pres. Rb. Haarlem 29 August 1986,
    Computerrecht 1988/5, p. 254; Pres. Rb. Rotterdam 21 March 1989,
    Computerrecht 1989/3, p. 149; Pres. Rb. Den Bosch 12 July 1990,
    Computerrecht 1990, p. 256. On the other hand, if an employee does
    have the task of developing software, and develops it during his own
    spare time, then the copyright will be credited to the employee.

[^468]: See Article 2 para 3 Software Directive. This article uses the
    wording “entitled to exercise all economic rights in the program”.
    The interesting question is whether non-economic rights, such as
    personality rights, stay with the actual author, the employee. This
    article applies to both private and public parties. See:
    Ambtenarengerecht Amsterdam 20 December 1989, Computerrecht 1990, p.
    141.

[^469]: Article 2 para 2 of the Copyright Act.

[^470]: According to Article 12 of the Copyright Act, communication to
    the public includes the communication to the public of a
    reproduction of the whole or part of a work; the distribution of the
    whole or part of a work, or of a reproduction thereof, as long as
    the work has not appeared in print; the rental or lending of the
    whole or part of a work, with the exception of works of architecture
    and works of applied art, or of a reproduction thereof which has
    been brought into circulation by or with the consent of the rights
    holder; the recitation, performance or presentation in public of the
    whole or part of a work or a reproduction thereof; the broadcasting
    of a work incorporated in a radio or television programme by
    satellite or other transmitter or by a closed-circuit system as
    referred to in Article 1 sub g of the “Wet op de
    Telecommunicatievoorzieningen”. This means that, more specific to
    computer programs, the communication to the public includes selling,
    or offering to sell, the carrier of the software, or making the
    software available for third parties to consult. According to
    Article 45h of the Copyright Act, the rental of computer programs is
    also a communication to the public.

[^471]: According to Article 13 of the Copyright Act, the reproduction
    of a work includes the translation, arrangement of music,
    cinematographic adaptation or dramatization and generally any
    partial or total adaption or imitation in a modified form, which
    cannot be regarded as a new, original work. This means that loading
    the software onto the hard disk or making a back-up is also a
    reproduction, compare: Pres. Rb. Arnhem 24 January 1995,
    Computerrecht 1995, p. 68. Thus, the criterion is that there have to
    be two or more copies of the work in order to amount to a
    reproduction. It is not relevant whether the copies are temporary or
    permanent. See also: D.W.F. Verkade, “Intellectuele Eigendom” in:
    Franken (Ed.), Recht en computer, Deventer: Kluwer 1997, p. 195,
    Verkade, Intellectuele Eigendom, Tekst & Commentaar Article 45i,
    annotation 2, Deventer: Kluwer 2009 and Rb. Zutphen 29 April 1999,
    Computerrecht 1999/4 (DWSS/Van Meggelen et al.).

[^472]: “Subject to the provisions of Articles 5 and 6, the exclusive
    rights of the rights holder within the meaning of Article 2, shall
    include the right to do or to authorise: (a) the permanent or
    temporary reproduction of a computer program by any means and in any
    form, in part or in whole. Insofar as loading, displaying, running,
    transmission or storage of the computer program necessitates such
    reproduction, such acts shall be subject to authorization by the
    rights holder; (b) the translation, adaption, arrangement and any
    other alteration of a computer program and the reproduction of the
    results thereof, without prejudice to the rights of the person who
    alters the program; (c) any form of distribution to the public,
    including the rental, of the original computer program or of copies
    thereof. The first sale in the Community of a copy of a program by
    the rights holder or with his consent shall exhaust the distribution
    right within the Community of that copy, with the exception of the
    right to control further rental of the program or a copy thereof.”

[^473]: Please note that Articles 45j — 45n of the Copyright Act only
    apply to software as such, thus, preparatory materials are not
    included. See: A. Meijboom, Recht en Informatietechnologie, SDU: The
    Hague 1999, 7.3.2., p.10.

[^474]: Article 45n of the Copyright Act provides that the Articles 5,
    16b, para 1 and 17, para 1 do not apply to computer programs.

[^475]: J.H. Spoor & D.W.F. Verkade & D.J.G. Visser, Auteursrecht,
    naburige rechten en databankenrecht, Deventer: Kluwer 2005; P.C. van
    Schelven & D.W.F. Verkade, Auteursrecht, Deventer: Kluwer 1993, pp.
    69-75.

[^476]: Thus, this does not include, for instance, rental of the work.

[^477]: In the Netherlands, the general copyright principle is based on
    international exhaustion. Thus, for the purposes of the exhaustion
    rule it does not matter where in the world the work is sold for the
    first time. Since the Dutch legislature has not implemented Article
    4 sub c into the Copyright Act it is not clear if the international
    or Community-wide exhaustion principle was applicable to software.
    In Pres. Rb. Den Haag 7 July 1995, IER 1995, 30 with annotation by
    De Wit, the court held that for software only Community-wide
    exhaustion is applicable. In ECJ 16 July 1998, C-355/96, IER 1998,
    35, with annotation by Arkenbout (Silhouette), the European Court of
    Justice decided that the first sale doctrine for trademarks provides
    for Community-wide exhaustion, rather than international exhaustion.
    The same applies to the first sale doctrine for copyrights. See: A.
    Meijboom, Recht en Informatietechnologie, SDU: The Hague 1999,
    7.3.2, p. 22.

[^478]: ECJ 3 July 2012, C-128/11, UsedSoft/Oracle. See also: Rb.
    Dordrecht, 11 August 2010, HA ZA 08-2747, ECLI:NL:RBDOR:2010:BN3863,
    Rb. Almelo 11 July 2012, KG ZA 12-117 ECLI:NL:RBALM:2012:BX2173 and
    HR 12 July 2013, ECLI:NL:HR:2013:CA0265 (Allposters/Pictoright).
    Further reading: A. Engelfriet: "De Usedsoft-uitspraak: een kleine
    revolutie", IT979,
    <http://www.itenrecht.nl/index.php?//De+UsedSoft-uitspraak%3A+een+kleine+revolutie////31800/>

[^479]: Implementing Article 5 para 1 of the Software Directive: “In the
    absence of specific contractual provisions, the acts referred to in
    Article 4 (a) and (b) shall not require authorization by the rights
    holder where they are necessary for the use of the computer program
    by the lawful acquirer in accordance with its intended purpose,
    including for error correction”.

[^480]: See: P.C. van Schelven & D.W.F. Verkade, Auteursrecht, Deventer:
    Kluwer 1993, pp. 79-82.

[^481]: See: P.C. van Schelven & D.W.F. Verkade, Auteursrecht, Deventer:
    Kluwer 1993, pp. 83-87 and D.W.F. Verkade, “Intellectuele Eigendom”
    in: Franken et al. (Eds.), Recht en computer, Deventer: Kluwer 1997,
    pp.198-200. But also: Pres. Rb. The Hague 24 August 1995,
    Computerrecht 1997, p. 303 with annotation by Meijboom and Verkade
    at (1.0) (Siemens-Nixdorf v Biba) and Hof The Hague 2 March 1995,
    Computerrecht 1995, pp. 173-174, at (13.6) (SiemensNixdorf v
    Gemini).

[^482]: See also: Rb. Dordrecht 11 August 2010, Case no. 78465 / HA ZA
    08-2747, ECLI:NL:RBDOR:2010:BN3863.

[^483]: Explanatory Memorandum TK 1991-1992, 22 531, no. 3, p. 13.

[^484]: However, Article 5 para 1 and Article 9 para 1 of the Software
    Directive provide the possibility of agreeing otherwise. The Dutch
    legislature seems to have followed the preamble of the Software
    Directive, which states that it concerns mandatory laws, see
    Explanatory Memorandum TK 1991-1992, 22 531, no. 3, p. 12.

[^485]: Implementing Article 5 para 2 of the Software Directive: “The
    making of a back-up copy by a person having a right to use the
    computer program may not be prevented by contract insofar as it is
    necessary for that use”.

[^486]: Although the Copyright Act does not define “rightful user”
    (“rechtmatige gebruiker”), it is generally understood that the
    rightful user is the person to whom the owner has made available the
    program (including resale), and also any subsequent purchasers of
    units for which the distribution right is exhausted. See: Rb.
    Dordrecht 11 August 2010, Case no. 78465 / HA ZA 08-2747,
    ECLI:NL:RBDOR:2010:BN3863.

[^487]: A. Meijboom, Recht en Informatietechnologie, SDU: Den Haag 1999,
    7.3.2., pp. 27-28.

[^488]: Implementing Article 5 para 3 of the Software Directive: “The
    person having a right to use a copy of a computer program shall be
    entitled, without the authorization of the rights holder, to
    observe, study or test the functioning of the program in order to
    determine the ideas and principles which underlie any element of the
    program if he does so while performing any of the acts of loading,
    displaying, running, transmitting or storing the program which he is
    entitled to do”.

[^489]: Explanatory Memorandum, TK 1991-1992, 22 531, nr 3, p. 14.

[^490]: Implementing Article 6 of the Software Directive: “1. The
    authorization of the rights holder shall not be required where
    reproduction of the code and translation of its form within the
    meaning of Article 4 (a) and (b) are indispensable to obtain
    information necessary to achieve the interoperability of an
    independently created computer program with other programs, provided
    that the following conditions are met: (a) these acts are performed
    by the licensee or by another person having a right to use a copy of
    a program, or on their behalf by a person authorized to do so; (b)
    the information necessary to achieve interoperability has not
    previously been readily available to the persons referred to in
    subparagraph (a); and (c) these acts are confined to the parts of
    the original program which are necessary to achieve
    interoperability; 2. The provisions of paragraph 1 shall not permit
    the information obtained through its application: (a) to be used for
    goals other than to achieve the interoperability of the
    independently created computer program; (b) to be given to others,
    except when necessary for the interoperability of the independently
    created computer program; or (c) to be used for the development,
    production or marketing of a computer program substantially similar
    in its expression, or for any other act which infringes copyright.
    3. In accordance with the provisions of the Berne Convention for the
    protection of Literary and Artistic Works, the provisions of this
    Article may not be interpreted in such a way as to allow its
    application to be used in a manner which unreasonably prejudices the
    right holder’s legitimate interests or conflicts with a normal
    exploitation of the computer program.” The Community legislature
    aimed this article at software producers so that they would make the
    information available and to stimulate the development of open
    systems. See Explanatory Memorandum TK 1991-1992, 22 531, no. 5, pp.
    31-32.

[^491]: This includes the determination of the ideas and principles
    underlying the computer program, Explanatory Memorandum 1991-1992,
    22 531, no. 3, p. 14, Article 45l Copyright Act and P.C. van
    Schelven & D.W.F. Verkade, Auteursrecht, Deventer: Kluwer 1993,
    pp.89-90.

[^492]: Parties cannot agree contractually that decompilation is
    forbidden. See M. de Cock Buning, “Auteursrecht en ‘\`reverse
    engineering”, techniek en theorie’', 1993, p. 128 ff.

[^493]: The Explanatory Memorandum TK 1991-1992, 22 531, no. 3, p. 16
    mentions licensees only.

[^494]: Explanatory Memorandum TK 1991-1992, 22 531, no. 3, p. 16.

[^495]: According to Article 25 of the Copyright Act, personality rights
    include the right to oppose the communication to the public of the
    work without acknowledgement of the author’s name or other
    indication of the author, unless such opposition would be
    unreasonable; the right to oppose a communication to the public of
    the work under a name other than the author’s own, and any
    alteration in the name of the work or the indication of the author,
    in so far as it appears on or in the work, or has been communicated
    to the public in connection with the work; the right to oppose any
    other alteration of the work, unless the nature of the alteration is
    such that opposition would be unreasonable; the right to oppose any
    distortion, mutilation or other impairment of the work that could be
    prejudicial to the name or reputation of the author or to his
    dignity as such.

[^496]: To our knowledge only two cases have dealt with the personality
    rights of a legal entity: Rb. The Hague 27 May 1992, AMI 1993, p.
    94, with annotation by Quadvlieg (Gorter eta al. v PTT Post et al.).
    and Hof Amsterdam, 10 December 2013, Angry Nerds v Hotel Contact,
    with annotation by Wouter Dammers:
    <https://www.lawfox.nl/mag-je-overgedragen-bronbestanden-wijzigen/>

[^497]: Again: Hof Amsterdam, 10 December 2013, Angry Nerds v Hotel
    Contact, with annotation by Wouter Dammers:
    <https://www.lawfox.nl/mag-je-overgedragen-bronbestanden-wijzigen/>

[^498]: For personality rights related to computer programs, see
    especially E.P.M. Thole, Software een “novum” in het vermogensrecht,
    Deventer: Kluwer 1991, P.C. Van Schelven & H. Struik, Softwarerecht,
    Deventer: Kluwer 1995, pp. 64-65 and D.W.F. Verkade, “Intellectuele
    Eigendom” in: Franken et al. (Eds.), Recht en computer, Deventer:
    Kluwer 1997, pp. 201-202.

[^499]: Implemented into the Copyright Act on 29 Dec 1995 because of the
    Council Directive 93/98/EEC of 29 October 1993 which harmonised the
    terms of protection of copyright and certain related rights.

[^500]: J. van Balen et al., Auteursrecht en open source software, in E.
    Thole, R. Scholten, W. Seinen (Ed.) Open Source Software — Een
    verkenning naar de juridische aspecten van open source software,
    NvvIR 2006, p. 44.

[^501]: One can also think of, for instance, a committee of experts, who
    examine whether contributions should be implemented into new
    versions of the software. In that case, the committee is a compiler
    in the sense of Article 5 of the Copyright Act, and would thus have
    the rights to the whole work, notwithstanding the rights that the
    contributors have in their contributions. See: K.J. Koelman,
    Brothers in Arms: open source en auteursrecht, 2004, 36.

[^502]: Compare, Ch. Gielen, D.W.F. Verkade (Eds.), Intellectuele
    Eigendom, Tekst en Commentaar, Kluwer: Deventer 2009, Art. 7 note 4.

[^503]: J. van Balen et al., Auteursrecht en open source software, in E.
    Thole, R. Scholten, W. Seinen (Ed.) Open Source Software — Een
    verkenning naar de juridische aspecten van open source software,
    NvvIR 2006, pp. 46-47.

[^504]: See: L. Guibault and O. van Daalen, Unravelling the Myth around
    Open Source Licenses — An Analysis from A Dutch and European Law
    Perspective, ITeR series no. 8, The Hague: TMC Asser Press 2006, p.
    94; and HR 25 March 1949, 1950, No. 643 with annotation by D.J.G.
    Visser (La belle et la bête).

[^505]: Hof 's-Hertogenbosch, 27 December 1994, NJ 1995 No. 623
    (Rooijakkers v Wouters), with annotation by D.W.V. Verkade. L.
    Guibault and O. van Daalen, “Unravelling the Myth around Open Source
    Licenses — An Analysis from a Dutch and European Law Perspective”,
    ITeR series no. 8, The Hague: TMC Asser Press 2006, pp. 91-95.

[^506]: J. van Balen et al, Auteursrecht en open source software, in E.
    Thole, R. Scholten, W. Seinen (Eds.) Open Source Software — Een
    verkenning naar de juridische aspecten van open source software,
    NvvIR 2006, pp. 48-49.

[^507]: See: Eric S. Raymond, The Cathedral and the Bazaar, O’Reilly,
    1999, p. 53: “The *utility function* Linux hackers are maximizing is
    not classically economic, but is the intangible of their own ego
    satisfaction and reputation among other hackers. (One may call their
    motivation *altruistic*, but this ignores the fact that altruism is
    itself a form of ego satisfaction for the altruist). Voluntary
    cultures that work this way are not actually uncommon; another in
    which I have long participated is science fiction fandom, which
    unlike hackerdom has long explicitly recognized *egoboo*
    (ego-boosting, or the enhancement of one’s reputation among other
    fans) as the basic drive behind volunteer activity”.

[^508]: The freedom to alter anything in the FOSS, without any
    restriction, even if the alteration would cause the destruction,
    mutilation and/or other impairment of the work.

[^509]: OSD Clauses 5 and 6.

[^510]: J. van Balen et al., Auteursrecht en open source software, in E.
    Thole, R. Scholten, W. Seinen (Eds.) Open Source Software — Een
    verkenning naar de juridische aspecten van open source software,
    2006, pp. 52-53.

[^511]: See: Wanda van Kerkvoorden, Software License Agreements and
    Software Distribution Agreements. The Dutch Way, in Esme Vos (Ed.)
    Licensing & Distributing Software in Europe — A Country by Country
    Look at Structuring International Software Agreements to Fit Your
    Needs, Aspatore Inc. 2005, pp. 164-167.

[^512]: L.M.C.R. Guibault, Copyright Limitations and contracts. An
    analysis of the contractual overridability of limitations on
    copyright, The Hague/London/Boston: Kluwer Law International 2002,
    p. 114.

[^513]: L. Guibault and O. van Daalen, Unravelling the Myth around Open
    Source Licenses — An Analysis from A Dutch and European Law
    Perspective, ITeR series no. 8, The Hague: TMC Asser Press 2006, pp.
    46-47.

[^514]: L. Guibault and O. van Daalen, Unravelling the Myth around Open
    Source Licenses — An Analysis from A Dutch and European Law
    Perspective, ITeR series no. 8, The Hague: TMC Asser Press 2006, pp.
    49-50.

[^515]: HR 13 March 1981, no. 11647, NJ 1981, No., 635 (Haviltex).

[^516]: L. Guibault and O. van Daalen, Unravelling the Myth around Open
    Source Licenses — An Analysis from A Dutch and European Law
    Perspective, ITeR series no. 8, The Hague: TMC Asser Press 2006, pp.
    51-55.

[^517]: L. Guibault and O. van Daalen, Unravelling the Myth around Open
    Source Licenses — An Analysis from A Dutch and European Law
    Perspective, ITeR series no. 8, The Hague: TMC Asser Press 2006, p.
    55.

[^518]: The declaration of intention can be made in any form, thus it
    may also be inferred from conduct.

[^519]: Which can take place in any form, unless the parties have agreed
    otherwise. Thus, also offer and acceptance exchanged via electronic
    means forms a multilateral juridical act, see: R.E. van Esch,
    Elektronische handel, in H. Franken, H.W.K. Kaspersen and A.H. De
    Wild, Recht en computer, 5 impression., Deventer, Kluwer: 2004, p.
    157.

[^520]: A.R. Bloembergen 1998, Rechtshandeling en overeenkomst,
    Deventer, Kluwer 1998, p. 71.

[^521]: Directive 2000/31/EC of the European Parliament and the Council
    of 8 June 2000 on certain legal aspects of information society
    services, in particular electronic commerce, in the internal market,
    17 July 2000, L 178/1, Art. 9 ff.; as transposed into the Dutch
    Civil Code by Aanpassingswet richtlijn inzake elektronische handel,
    Stb. 2004, no. 210.

[^522]: Any service normally provided for remuneration, at a distance,
    by electronic means and at the individual request of a recipient of
    services. The Explanatory Memorandum of the Dutch implementation act
    (TK 2001-2002, 28 197, no. 3, p. 12), explains that this expression
    should be understood in broad terms and should not be limited to
    services where a contract must be concluded; it should also be
    understood as covering activities for which the buyer pays nothing,
    if these activities are generally offered against the payment of a
    price or if they otherwise possess a certain economic value. Thus,
    the vast majority of FOSS distributors on the Internet could
    constitute an economic activity that should be covered by the
    definition of Internet Society Service. See: L. Guibault and O. van
    Daalen, Unravelling the Myth around Open Source Licenses — An
    Analysis from A Dutch and European Law Perspective, ITeR series no.
    8, The Hague: TMC Asser Press 2006, p. 57.

[^523]: For instance the Information Society Service must supply its
    name and geographic address, as well as its electronic mail address,
    in order to allow rapid contact and communication in a direct and
    effective manner. Dutch law also provides similar obligations
    vis-à-vis information on suppliers of goods and providers of
    services to consumers (Article 7:46a ff. Dutch Civil Code), as a
    result of the implementation of Directive 97/7/EC of the European
    Parliament and of the Council of 20 May 1997 on the Protection of
    Consumers in Respect of Distance Contracts, OJ, L 144, 4 June 1997,
    pp. 19-27, Art. 4.

[^524]: This does not apply to contracts concluded exclusively by the
    exchange of electronic mail or by equivalent individual
    communications.

[^525]: See, for instance, clause 5 GPLv2.

[^526]: L. Guibault and O. van Daalen, Unravelling the Myth around Open
    Source Licenses — An Analysis from A Dutch and European Law
    Perspective, ITeR series no. 8, The Hague: TMC Asser Press 2006, pp.
    56-59.

[^527]: A term must be regarded as “not individually negotiated” where
    it has been drafted in advance and the licensee has not been able to
    influence the substance of the term, particularly in the context of
    a pre-formulated standard contract. See: L. Guibault and O. van
    Daalen, Unravelling the Myth around Open Source Licenses — An
    Analysis from A Dutch and European Law Perspective, ITeR series no.
    8, The Hague: TMC Asser Press 2006, p. 61 and Directive on Unfair
    Terms in Consumer Contracts, 93/13/EEC, of 5 April 1993, L 95/29.

[^528]: Explanatory Memorandum, Parliamentary History, InvW 6, no. 3, p.
    1573.

[^529]: M. Berghuis, Informatielicenties — Een analyse van UCITA en de
    rechtspraktijk in Nederland en de Verenigde Staten, The Hague: SDU
    2005.

[^530]: This principle means that parties to an agreement are, in
    principle, free to determine the content of that agreement.

[^531]: For instance, restricting or disclaiming the legal liability of
    a seller or supplier in the event of the death of a consumer, or
    personal injury caused by an act or omission of that seller or
    supplier.

[^532]: HR 19 May 1967, 1967 No. 261 (Saladin v HBU): all relevant
    circumstances should be taken into account, including but not
    limited to the seriousness of the gross negligence, in particular in
    relation to the nature and gravity of the related interests; the
    nature and content of the agreement; the social position of the
    parties and their mutual relationship; the way in which the
    agreement was formed and the degree of consensus of agreement with
    the other party. Following this case, more relevant circumstances
    were suggested by legal scholars, some of which the Dutch Supreme
    Court has followed, for instance if there is a disparity between the
    price of goods and the possibility of damages, a disclaimer should
    be considered reasonable; and the possibility of insurance.

[^533]: See also: W. Dammers and M. Weij, Aansprakelijk voor fouten in
    (open source) software, of toch niet?, in H. Sleurink, J.
    Stedehouder and J.W. Broekema (Ed.) Open source jaarboek 2009-2010,
    Media Update Vakpublicaties: Gorredijk 2010, pp. 149-166.

[^534]: A company employing fewer than 50 employees, or other small
    businesses that are comparable to consumers, as they have a weaker
    bargaining position. Thus, such companies benefit from the reflex
    effect (“reflexwerking”) of a protective legal regime.

[^535]: However, this regime does not apply to terms that deal with the
    definition of the main object of the contract, or with the adequacy
    of the price and remuneration in relation to the goods or services
    supplied, insofar as these terms are in plain intelligible language
    (“kernbedingen”). The unfairness of contractual terms is to be
    assessed in light of the nature of the goods or services for which
    the contract was concluded and all the circumstances attending the
    conclusion of the contract, as well as all the other terms of the
    contract. See: L. Guibault and O. van Daalen, Unravelling the Myth
    around Open Source Licenses — An Analysis from A Dutch and European
    Law Perspective, ITeR series no. 8, The Hague: TMC Asser Press 2006,
    pp. 83-84.

[^536]: However, this is not a clear-cut case. A product is a physical
    object subject to human control. One can argue that software is not
    “physical” (notwithstanding its physical carrier), and thus not a
    product (nor is the developer a producer). See: W. Dammers and M.
    Weij, Aansprakelijk voor fouten in (open source) software, of toch
    niet?, in H. Sleurink, J. Stedehouder and J.W. Broekema (Eds.) Open
    source jaarboek 2009-2010, Media Update Vakpublicaties: Gorredijk
    2010, pp. 149-166.

[^537]: See: Article 6 GPL v 2.

[^538]: E.N.M. Visser, GNU General Public License — All rights
    reserved?, 2005, pp. 226-229.

[^539]: See: L. Guibault and O. van Daalen, Unravelling the Myth around
    Open Source Licenses — An Analysis from A Dutch and European Law
    Perspective, ITeR series no. 8, The Hague: TMC Asser Press 2006, pp.
    75-76.

[^540]: The original licensor offers the FOSS under a FOSS licence. The
    licensee acquires the FOSS from the licensor. The sublicensee
    acquires the FOSS from the licensee. If the sublicensee distributes
    the FOSS without the FOSS licence.

[^541]: Such as the loss of royalties and damages which are not
    financial losses (Article 6:106 Dutch Civil Code).

[^542]: Although the wording of the article is in addition to claiming
    damages (“naast schadevergoeding”), HR 14 April 2000, NJ 2000, 489,
    AMI 2000, p. 134, ECLI:NL:HR:2000:AA5519 (Danestyle v HBS) held that
    the aggrieved party may choose between these actions, whichever is
    more beneficial: a claim for damages or a claim for profits to be
    handed over. He is not entitled to claim both. See: Ch. Gielen,
    D.W.F. Verkade (Ed.), Intellectuele Eigendom, Tekst en Commentaar,
    Kluwer: Deventer 2009 Article 28 note 1 sub c.

[^543]: For the calculation of these profits, its relation to Article
    6:104 Dutch Civil Code and the deductions to be taken into account
    see Deurvorst, Schadevergoeding en winstafdracht bij inbreuk op
    intellectuele eigendomsrechten, Lelystad 1991 and J.H. Spoor, D.W.F.
    Verkade and D.J.G. Visser, Auteursrecht, naburige rechten en
    databankenrecht, Kluwer: Deventer 2005, par. 11.14 ff.

[^544]: See Deurvorst, Schadevergoeding en winstafdracht bij inbreuk op
    intellectuele eigendomsrechten, Lelystad 1991 and J.H. Spoor, D.W.F.
    Verkade and D.J.G. Visser, Auteursrecht, naburige rechten en
    databankenrecht, Kluwer: Deventer 2005, par. 11.14ff.

[^545]: Please note that these remedies may not be exercised in respect
    of goods in the possession of persons who do not trade in such goods
    and who have obtained them exclusively for private use, unless they
    have infringed the copyrights themselves. This article was
    implemented into Dutch legislation in 2007, as a consequence of
    Directive 2004/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
    of 29 April 2004 on the enforcement of intellectual property rights.

[^546]: If no term has been set for the performance. See Article 6:38
    Dutch Civil Code

[^547]: When a term has been set for the performance, Article 6:39 Dutch
    Civil Code states that it is presumed only to bar an earlier demand
    of performance. The right of performance is regulated in Section 6,
    Title 1, Book 6 Dutch Civil Code.

[^548]: Article 6:227a, para 1 Dutch Civil Code, applies accordingly.

[^549]: Articles 6:271, 6:272 and 6:269 of the Dutch Code of Civil
    Procedure.

[^550]: Rb. Zwolle-Lelystad 14 March 2007, ECLI:NL:RBZLY:2007:BA4950
    (Stokke v Marktplaats) at \[2.19

[^551]: Rb. Zwolle-Lelystad, 21 November 2010, KG ZA 10-477,
    ECLI:NL:RBZLY:2010:BP5690 (Purple Pigeon/Quinarx). In this case,
    Quinarx defended itself against an infringement claim that Purple
    Pigeon waived its copyrights because it used open source software.
    Although the defense isn’t described more clear, it is in any event
    incorrect: use of open source software, in any event, does not mean
    that the author waived its copyrights. Besides that, the court seems
    to state that the open source software does not *contaminate* Purple
    Pigeon’s own software since it was allowed to encrypt its code.

[^552]: L. Guibault and O. van Daalen, Unravelling the Myth around Open
    Source Licenses — An Analysis from a Dutch and European Law
    Perspective, ITeR series no. 8, The Hague: TMC Asser Press 2006, pp.
    149-152.

[^553]: Directive 2004/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the
    Council of 29 April 2004 on the enforcement of intellectual property
    rights.

[^554]: As a consequence of the implementation of the Directive
    2004/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April
    2004 on the enforcement of intellectual property rights.

[^555]: This requirement can be accompanied by some subsequent implicit
    requirements such as necessity, proportionality and subsidiarity.
    See: W.F. Dammers, Examining Ex Parte in Rei Patenti, Wolf Legal
    Publishers: Nijmegen 2011.

[^556]: W.F. Dammers, Examining Ex Parte in Rei Patenti, Wolf Legal
    Publishers: Nijmegen 2011 and J.Berg and D.Visser, Ex-parte-praktijk
    in het auteursrecht, AMI 2009, no. 3, pp. 85-90.

[^557]: WIPO Copyright Treaty, December 20, 1996 (1997) 36 I.L.M. 65.
    Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights,
    Annex 1C of the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade
    Organization, signed in Marrakesh, Morocco on 15 April 1994.

[^558]: The Criminal Code (in Polish: Kodeks Karny) of 6 June 1997,
    Journal of Laws (Dziennik Ustaw) No 88, item 553, with subsequent
    amendments. Chapter XXXV — Offences against Property — Article 278.
    § 1. Whoever, with the purpose of appropriating, willfully takes
    someone else’s movable property shall be subject to the penalty of
    deprivation of liberty for a term of between 3 months and 5
    years. — § 2. The same punishment shall be imposed on anyone, who
    without the permission of the authorized person, acquires someone
    else’s computer software with the purpose of gaining material
    benefit.

[^559]: The Act on Authors Rights and Neighbouring Rights (in Polish:
    ustawa o prawie autorskim i prawach pokrewnych) of 4 February 1994,
    published in Journal of Laws (Dziennik Ustaw) No 24, item 83,
    consolidated text of 16 May 2006, Journal of Laws (Dziennik Ustaw)
    No 90, item 631, with subsequent amendments.

[^560]: The provisions of Civil Code are treated as *lex generali*. If
    the legal relationships concerning copyright are not regulated by
    the ARNR, the provisions of the Civil Code may be applicable
    directly or with changes.

[^561]: Z. RADWAŃSKI, *GREEN PAPER An Optimal Vision of the Civil Code
    of the Republic of Poland*, Ministry of Justice Warsaw 2006, p. 25.

[^562]: OJ L 122, 17 May 1991, p. 42-46, special edition in Polish:
    Chapter 17 Volume 01 P. 114-118.

[^563]: Article 91 of the Polish Constitution. 1. After promulgation
    thereof in the Journal of Laws of the Republic of Poland (Dziennik
    Ustaw), a ratified international agreement shall constitute part of
    the domestic legal order and shall be applied directly, unless its
    application depends on the enactment of a statute. 2. An
    international agreement ratified upon prior consent granted by
    statute shall have precedence over statutes if such an agreement
    cannot be reconciled with the provisions of such statutes. 3. If an
    agreement, ratified by the Republic of Poland, establishing an
    international organization so provides, the laws established by it
    shall be applied directly and have precedence in the event of a
    conflict of laws.

[^564]: Article 7 of the ARNR.

[^565]: Article 1 of the ARNR.

[^566]: See: J. BARTA, *Ustawa o prawie autorskim i prawach pokrewnych.
    Komentarz*, Dom Wydawniczy ABC, Warszawa 2001, p. 68.

[^567]: Article 1(2) of the ARNR.

[^568]: Judgement of the Supreme Court of 31 March 1953, case file II C
    834/52. As a subject of copyright law have been considered health
    and safety instructions — judgement of the Supreme Court of 23 July
    1971, case file II CR 244/71, unpublished, instructions for
    operating a machine — judgement of the Supreme Court of 25 April
    1969, case file I CR 76/69, published at OSNCP 1970, No. 1, item 15,
    train timetables, cookbooks, patterns and forms — judgement of the
    Supreme Court of 8 November 1932, case file II. 1K. 1092/32,
    published in Zb. Orz. 1933/I item 7.

[^569]: Article 74 of the ARNR.

[^570]: Judgment of the Appellate Court in Poznań of 4 January 1995 case
    file I ACr 422/94, published in T. GRZESZAK, *Prawo autorskie w
    orzecznictwie (CD-ROM)*, Warszawa 1995.

[^571]: Judgement of 13 October 2005, case file FSK 2253/04, published
    in electronic database LEX, under the no. 173097.

[^572]: Article 8 of the ARNR.

[^573]: The judgement of the court will replace the declaration of
    intent.

[^574]: Condominium/co-ownership/joint-ownership regulated in Articles
    195-221 of the Civil Code.

[^575]: Article 9 of the ARNR.

[^576]: Article 10 of the ARNR.

[^577]: Article 11 of the ARNR.

[^578]: Article 74(4)1-3 of the ARNR.

[^579]: J. BŁESZYŃSKI, *Prawo autorskie*, Warszawa 1985, p. 132.

[^580]: See: for instance section 3 of the ARNR, entitled Lawful Use of
    Protected Works. Article 23(1). It shall be permissible, without the
    consent of the creator, to make use free of charge, for personal
    purposes, of a work that has already been disclosed. However, this
    provision shall not authorize the construction of a building based
    on an architectural work or a work of urban architecture made by
    another person. 2. Personal use shall extend to use within a circle
    of persons who are personally related, in particular by blood or
    marriage, or who entertain social relations.

[^581]: Article 77 of the ARNR.

[^582]: Article 36 of the ARNR.

[^583]: Article 74(3) of the ARNR.

[^584]: J. BARTA, R. MARKIEWICZ, 'Oprogramowanie open source, w świetle
    prawa. Między własnością a wolnością', Zakamycze, Kraków 2005, p.
    67.

[^585]: Article 49 (2) of the ARNR.

[^586]: Article 41(3) of the ARNR.

[^587]: J. BARTA, *Oprogramowanie (…)*, p. 81.

[^588]: *Ibidem*.

[^589]: The civil partnership is the simplest form of conducting
    business by two or more entrepreneurs. This form has no legal
    personality and its functions are governed by contract law (Articles
    860-875 of the Civil Code). Partners of civil partnership are
    subject of rights. The partnership itself is only a contract and
    does not constitute an independent legal entity. The consequence of
    lack of legal personality is that a partnership does not own
    property. All rights and obligations are contracted on behalf of
    partners and fall to their common property. Partners have the asset
    which constitutes their joint ownership of the total.

[^590]: Article 860 of the CC § 1 By a deed of partnership, the partners
    shall undertake to promote the attainment of a common economic
    objective by acting in a specified manner and, in particular, by
    making contributions. § 2. The deed of partnership shall be made in
    writing.

[^591]: Parties of the civil partnership agreement shall establish in
    the text of the agreement rules of cooperation and commitment to
    achieve a collective business purpose. These are *inter alia*
    essential aspects i.e. the minimum contents of a contract in order
    for it to be held effective and legally binding.

[^592]: J. BARTA, *Oprogramowanie (…)*, p. 83.

[^593]: *Ibidem*, p. 115.

[^594]: The “goods” in this context mean material items as well as other
    property rights.

[^595]: J. BARTA, *Oprogramowanie (…)*, p. 116.

[^596]: *Ibidem*, p. 117.

[^597]: Article 75 of the ARNR. (1). Unless otherwise provided in the
    contract, the acts specified in paragraph 4(1) and (2) of Article 74
    shall not require the consent of the owner of rights where they are
    necessary for the lawful acquirer to be able to make use of the
    program according to its intended purpose, including the correction
    of errors. (2). The following acts shall not require authorization
    from the owner of rights: (1) the making of a backup or reserve copy
    insofar as such a copy is necessary for the use of the computer
    program; unless otherwise provided in the contract, the copy may not
    be used at the same time as the computer program; (2) analysis and
    study of and experimentation with the operation of the computer
    program by the person authorized under the contract to make use of a
    copy of the program, in order to ascertain its underlying ideas and
    principles, if the person concerned performs the above acts at the
    time of the operations associated with the loading, display,
    running, transmission or storage of the computer program; (3)
    reproduction of the code or translation of the form thereof within
    the meaning of paragraph 4(1) and (2) of Article 74 where this is
    essential to the securing of the information necessary to achieve
    interoperability between an independently created computer program
    and other programs, and provided that the following conditions are
    met: (a) the acts are performed by the licencee or by another person
    enjoying the right to use the copy of a program or, on their behalf,
    by a person authorized to do so; (b) the information necessary to
    achieve interoperability was not already easily and rapidly
    accessible to the persons referred to under (a); (c) the acts are
    confined to those parts of the original program that are necessary
    to achieve interoperability.

[^598]: J. BARTA, *Oprogramowanie (…)*, p. 117-118.

[^599]: T. JAEGER, A. METZGER, *Open Source Software — Rechtliche
    Rahmenbedingungen der Freien Software*. München: C.H. Beck-Verlag,
    2002, p. 147.

[^600]: J. BARTA, *Oprogramowanie (…)*, p. 116.

[^601]: Article 890 § 1 of the CC. The donor’s declaration shall be made
    in the form of a notarial deed. However, a contract of donation
    concluded without the observance of that form shall become valid if
    the promised performance has been effected.

[^602]: Article 890 § 2 of the CC. The above provisions shall not
    overrule those provisions which in view of the object of the
    donation require the observance of a special form of the
    declarations of both parties.

[^603]: J. BARTA, *Oprogramowanie (…)*, p. 121.

[^604]: See: footnote 42.

[^605]: J. BARTA, *Oprogramowanie (…)*, p. 86.

[^606]: T. RYCHLICKI, *GPLv3: New Software Licence and New Axiology of
    Intellectual Property Law*, E.I.P.R. 2008, 30(6), pp. 232-243,
    citing R.M. Stallman, *Misinterpreting Copyright*, available at
    [http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/misinterpreting-copyright.html — last](http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/misinterpreting-copyright.html — last)
    accessed 26 July 2010.

[^607]: *What Does Free Mean? or What do you mean by Free Software?*,
    available at
    [http://www.debian.org/intro/free — last](http://www.debian.org/intro/free — last)
    visited 26 March 2010. The discussion whether GNU GPL is a contract
    or a licence was published in E. Moglen, *Free Software Matters:
    Enforcing the GPL I*, available at
    [http://emoglen.law.columbia.edu/publications/lu-12.html — last](http://emoglen.law.columbia.edu/publications/lu-12.html — last)
    visited 26 July 2010.

[^608]: J. BARTA, *Oprogramowanie (…)*, p. 86.

[^609]: *Ibidem*.

[^610]: J. BARTA, *Oprogramowanie (…)*, p. 87.

[^611]: *Ibidem*, p. 88

[^612]: J. BARTA, *Oprogramowanie (…)*, p. 89.

[^613]: Article 9(1-3) of the ARNR.

[^614]: J. BARTA, *Oprogramowanie (…)*, p. 90.

[^615]: Article 12 of the CC provides that one who has not attained the
    age of thirteen and who is completely incapacitated has no legal
    capacity. Under article 15 of the CC, minors who have completed
    thirteen years old have limited legal capacity.

[^616]: Article 17 of the CC. Subject to the exceptions provided by
    civil code, the validity of a transaction, whereby a person of
    limited legal capacity incurs a liability or disposes of its laws,
    requires the consent of his or her legal representative.

[^617]: In this aspect the copyleft clause is very “restrictive” when it
    comes to imposing an obligation on minor’s.

[^618]: J. BARTA, *Oprogramowanie (…)*, p. 92.

[^619]: *Ibidem*, p. 93.

[^620]: Article 304\$\^5\$ of the Polish Labour Code, providing rules
    for exceptional performance of work by children.

[^621]: Article 66 § 1 of the CC. A declaration made to another party of
    the intent to conclude a contract shall be deemed an offer if it
    determines the essential provisions of the contract.

[^622]: Article 70 of the CC § 1. In case of doubt, a contract shall be
    considered concluded at the moment when the maker of the offer
    receives the declaration of its acceptance, and if it is not
    required that the maker of the offer receive the declaration of its
    acceptance at the moment when the other party proceeds to perform
    the contract. § 2. In case of doubt, a contract shall be considered
    concluded at the place where the maker of the offer received the
    declaration of its acceptance, and if it is not required that the
    maker of the offer receive the declaration of its acceptance or the
    offer is made electronically at the place of residence or in the
    seat of the maker of the offer at the moment of conclusion of the
    contract.

[^623]: J. BARTA, *Oprogramowanie (…)*, p. 93.

[^624]: *An expression of willingness to negotiate. A person making an
    invitation to treat does not intend to be bound as soon as it is
    accepted by the person to whom the statement is addressed*, See: A.
    BURROWS, Casebook on Contract (Hart Publishing, 2007) Ed. See also:
    [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Invitation\_to\_treat — last](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Invitation_to_treat — last)
    visited 15 August 2010.

[^625]: J. BARTA, *Oprogramowanie (…)*, p. 94.

[^626]: See: Section 5 of the GPL2.

[^627]: Article 69 of the CC provides for the so-called “silent adoption
    of the offer”. A statement of the acceptance of offer is not
    required, particularly where an offerer requests the immediate
    implementation of the contract. The contract takes effect, if the
    other party in time for its implementation will proceed, otherwise
    the offer ceases to be binding.

[^628]: J. BARTA, *Oprogramowanie (…)*, p. 89.

[^629]: Article 89 of the CC defines the “resolutive condition”. Subject
    to the exceptions provided by Civil Code or under the properties of
    legal action, the creation or termination of the effects of legal
    action can be dependent on future and uncertain event (condition).

[^630]: J. MARLY, *Software Überlassungsverträge*, 2nd ed. Munich 1997,
    p. 204.

[^631]: J. BARTA, *Oprogramowanie (…)*, pp. 101-102.

[^632]: *Ibidem*, p. 106.

[^633]: See: J. BARTA, *Oprogramowanie (…)*, p. 108, and previously
    mentioned issues on FOSS and Minors.

[^634]: Continuous obligations unlimited in time shall expire after a
    notice has been given by the debtor or creditor with the observance
    of contractual, statutory or customary time limits, and where there
    are no such time limits, immediately after said notice has been
    given.

[^635]: Article 58 of the CC § 1. Any legal action that is contrary to
    law or intended to circumvent the law is null void, unless the
    relevant rule provides a different result, in particular, this, that
    in place of the invalid provisions of the legal transaction includes
    the relevant provisions of the Act.

[^636]: J. BARTA, *Oprogramowanie (…)*, p. 113.

[^637]: The messenger is a person who only passes already prepared
    declaration of will of another person to the addressee.

[^638]: J. BARTA, *Oprogramowanie (…)*, pp. 126.

[^639]: *Ibidem*, p. 127.

[^640]: J. BARTA, *Oprogramowanie (…)*, p. 134. It was noted that the
    provisions of the CeCILL licence agreement explicitly provide for
    the prevention of further use of the program in breach of the
    provisions of this agreement.}

[^641]: *Ibidem*.

[^642]: Article 79 of the ARNR.

[^643]: The claim for compensation for the damage caused is fully based
    on the principles of tort liability as provided in Article 415 of
    the Civil Code. See J. BARTA, R. MARKIEWICZ (in:) J. BARTA, M.
    CZAJKOWSKA-DĄBROWSKA, Z. ĆWIĄKALSKI, R. MARKIEWICZ, E. TRAPLE,
    *Ustawa o prawie autorskim i prawach pokrewnych. Komentarz*,
    Warszawa 2003, p. 559). However, the legal nature of these claims is
    still debatable. Polish law knows contractual, statutory or
    tortious/penal nature of legal claims. According to the judgment of
    the Polish Supreme Court of 22 October 1974 published in OSN 1975,
    no 10-11, item 153, these claims may be enforced jointly.

[^644]: Article 9(4) — first sentence, of the ARNR.

[^645]: J. BARTA, *Oprogramowanie (…)*, p. 136.

[^646]: Contracting parties may establish legal relationship at their
    discretion, so long as the relationship or its purpose are not
    against to specific (kind) of this relationsship, the Act nor the
    rules of social coexistence.

[^647]: Article 29 of the PIL in connection with Article 27 of the PIL.

[^648]: Article 7. Where it shall prove impossible to establish
    circumstances which determine the governing foreign law, or where it
    shall prove impossible to indicate the substance of the governing
    foreign law, the Polish law shall apply. See: J. BARTA,
    *Oprogramowanie (…)*, p. 149

[^649]: See: footnote 67.

[^650]: J. BARTA, *Oprogramowanie (…)*, p. 150.

[^651]: See:
    [http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-faq.html\#GPLTranslations — last](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-faq.html#GPLTranslations — last)
    visited 18 Agust 2010.

[^652]: Published in Journal of Laws (Dziennik Ustaw) of 1999 No 90 item
    999 with subsequent amendments.

[^653]: See: J. BARTA, *Oprogramowanie (…)*, p. 168.

[^654]: Article 74 § 1. The reservation that a contract has to be in
    writing without invalidity rigor if such contract has not been made
    in writing, has the effect that in case of failure to comply with
    restricted forms, the evidence of the witnesses or evidence of
    hearing are not allowed in disputes arising from the contract. This
    provision does not apply when the written form is reserved only for
    given effects of legal action.

[^655]: Article 73 § 2 of the CC. The failure to use a particular form
    of legal act/action makes it void. The specific formalities that are
    required or otherwise the contract is valid.

[^656]: See: J. BARTA, *Oprogramowanie (…)*, p. 169.

[^657]: The application of these provisions are forced by the Act on
    Polish language and are deemed as *ius cogens* — one can not
    contractually disable/exclude this provisions.

[^658]: See: J. BARTA, *Oprogramowanie (…)*, p. 170.

[^659]: *Ibidem*, p. 190.

[^660]: Published in Journal of Laws, No 141, item 1176 with subsequent
    amendments.

[^661]: See: J. BARTA, *Oprogramowanie (…)*, p. 171.

[^662]: Published in Journal of Laws, No 22, item 271 with subsequent
    amendments. Article 6(1). The consumer contracts concluded without
    simultaneous presence of both parties, by way of a use of means of
    communication at a distance, in particular order form without the
    address or addressed, serial letter, press advertising with a
    printed order form, catalogue, telephone, radio, television,
    automatic calling machine, videophone, videotext, electronic mail,
    facsimile machine, shall be considered distance contracts, provided
    that the party to the contract with the consumer is the entrepreneur
    who organised in such a way his business activity. 2. The proposal
    to conclude the contract in a form of an offer, invitation to offer
    or order, or to start negotiations should univocally and clearly
    indicate the intention of the person making such proposal to
    conclude the contract. 3. Making use of videophone, facsimile
    machine, electronic mail, automatic calling machine and telephone in
    order to propose the conclusion of a contract may be done only upon
    the prior consent of the consumer.

[^663]: Published in Journal of Laws of 2002, No 144, item 1204 with
    subsequent amendments.

[^664]: Article 17 of the PRCLL.

[^665]: Article 7(1) of the PRCLL.

[^666]: See: J. BARTA, *Oprogramowanie (…)*, p. 172.

[^667]: A model contract, in particular the general provisions of the
    terms of an agreement, sample contract, regulations, determined by
    one party, is binding for another party if it was served before the
    conclusion of the contract.

[^668]: See: J. BARTA, *Oprogramowanie (…)*, p. 173.

[^669]: *Ibidem*, p. 174.

[^670]: *Ibidem*, p. 177.

[^671]: *Ibidem*, p. 178.

[^672]: *Ibidem*, p. 179.

[^673]: The Act on Goods and Services Tax — GSTA — (in Polish: ustawa o
    podatku od towarów i usług) of 11 March 2004, Journal od Laws
    (Dziennik Ustaw) No. 54, item 535 with subsequent amendments.

[^674]: The letter of 10 March 2006, case file PB3/GM-8213-12/06/144.

[^675]: The Act of 15 February 1992 on Legal Entities' Income Tax (in
    Polish: Ustawa o podatku dochodowym od osób prawnych) consolidated
    text published in Journal of Laws (Dziennik Ustaw) of 2000, No. 54,
    item 654 with subsequent amendments, and the Act on Personal Income
    Tax — PITA — (in Polish: ustawa o podatku dochodowym od osób
    fizycznych) of 26 July 1991, Journal of Laws (Dziennik Ustaw) No.
    80, item 350, with subsequent amendments.

[^676]: T. RYCHLICKI, *Tax law, case file PB3/GM-8213-12/06/144,*
    available at
    [http://rychlicki.net/en/2006/05/21/4678/ — last](http://rychlicki.net/en/2006/05/21/4678/ — last)
    visited 17 August 2010.

[^677]: The decision of 10 February 2006 case file PO/005-1/06.

[^678]: T. RYCHLICKI, *Tax law, case file PO/005-1/06,* available at
    [http://rychlicki.net/en/2006/05/21/4699/ — last](http://rychlicki.net/en/2006/05/21/4699/ — last)
    visited 17 August 2010.

[^679]: The interpretation of 27 March 2006 case file
    USPP-IV-440/30/06/P-I/23717.

[^680]: T. RYCHLICKI, *Tax law, case USPP-IV-440/30/06/P-I/23717,*
    available at
    [http://rychlicki.net/en/2006/04/21/4701/ — last](http://rychlicki.net/en/2006/04/21/4701/ — last)
    visited 2 August 2010.

[^681]: K. SIEWICZ, *Opodatkowanie wolnego oprogramowania,* available at
    [http://ksiewicz.net/?p=35 — last](http://ksiewicz.net/?p=35 — last)
    visited 10 August 2010.

[^682]: The Voivodeship Administrative Court in its order of 30 January
    2004 case file II SA 3732/03
    <http://orzeczenia.nsa.gov.pl/doc/504405F483>. The judgment of the
    Supreme Administrative Court of 3 March 2004 case file OSK 600/04
    [http://orzeczenia.nsa.gov.pl/doc/C49E291A37 — See](http://orzeczenia.nsa.gov.pl/doc/C49E291A37 — See):
    T. RYCHLICKI, *Access to public information, case OSK 600/04*,
    available at
    [http://rychlicki.net/en/2006/09/12/4627/ — last](http://rychlicki.net/en/2006/09/12/4627/ — last)
    visited 16 August 2010.

[^683]: The Act on the Informatization of Activities Undertaken by
    Entities Fulfilling Public Tasks (in Polish: ustawa o informatyzacji
    działalności podmiotów realizujących zadania publiczne) of 17
    February 2005, published in Journal of Laws of 2005 No 64, item 565
    with subsequent amendments.

[^684]: Płatnik is a free software but not open source. It is used to
    fill in and send a statement of payment declarations to the Social
    Insurance Institution. It works only with MS Windows. See: T.
    RYCHLICKI, *Access to public information, case V Ca 454/07*,
    available at
    [http://rychlicki.net/en/2007/07/30/4812/ — last](http://rychlicki.net/en/2007/07/30/4812/ — last)
    visited 17 August 2010.

[^685]: The Act on Protection of Databases (in Polish: Ustawa o ochronie
    baz danych) of 27 July 2001, Journal of Laws (Dziennik Ustaw) No.
    128, item 1402 with subsequent amendments. This Act transposed the
    Directive 96/9/EC of 11 March 1996 on the legal protection of
    databases (OJ L 77, 27 March 1996).

[^686]: Judgment of 7 January 2004, case file II CK 174/02.

[^687]: As defined in Articles 3 and 13 of the Polish Act of 16 April
    1993 on Combating Unfair Competition. Article 3 of the CUC. (1) The
    act of unfair competition shall be the activity contrary to the law
    or good practices which threatens or infringes the interest of
    another entrepreneur or customer. (2) The acts of unfair competition
    shall be in particular: misleading designation of the company, false
    or deceitful indication of the geographical origin of products or
    services, misleading indication of products or services,
    infringement of the business secrecy, inducing to dissolve or to not
    execute the agreement, imitating products, slandering or dishonest
    praise, impeding access to the market and unfair or prohibited
    advertising and organising a system of pyramid selling. — Article 13
    of the CUC (1) Imitating a finished product by way of technical
    means of reproduction, to copy an external image of such product
    where it may mislead customers as to the identity of the producer or
    product, shall be the act of unfair competition. (2) Imitating
    functional features of a product, in particular its make, structure
    and form ensuring its usefulness shall not be deemed the act of
    unfair competition. Where the imitation of functional features of a
    finished product requires including its characteristic form, which
    may mislead customers as to the producer or product identity, the
    imitator is under obligation to adequately mark the product.

[^688]: Decree-law 252/94, of October 20, as last amended by Decree-law
    334/97, of November 27 (hereinafter, the “Software Act”).

[^689]: Council Directive 91/250/EEC of 14 May 1991 on the legal
    protection of computer programs, repealed and replaced by Directive
    2009/24/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April
    2009 on the legal protection of computer programs (Codified version)
    (hereinafter, the “Software Directive”).

[^690]: Código do Direito de Autor e dos Direitos Conexos, Decree-Law
    63/85, of March 14, as last amended by Law 82/2013, of December 6)
    (hereinafter, the “PCA”).

[^691]: The third indent of the preamble reads: “(…) the core concepts
    of software protection entail new realities that do not easily fall
    under copyright, even though their equivalence to literary works
    might occasionally allow for approximation.” (authors' translation)

[^692]: See, inter alia, J.A. VIEIRA, A Protecção dos Programas de
    Computador pelo Direito de Autor, Lisboa, Lex, 2005 (hereinafter
    “VIEIRA 2005”), pp. 215ff.; G. MARQUES & L. MARTINS, Direito da
    Informática, 2006 (hereinafter “MARQUES & MARTINS”), pp. 570ff.

[^693]: In this Chapter, we will refer interchangeably to “computer
    programs” and “software”.

[^694]: See MARQUES & MARTINS, p. 574. See also similarly M. LOPES ROCHA
    & P. CORDEIRO, Protecção Jurídica do Software, 2005 (hereinafter
    “ROCHA & CORDEIRO”), pp. 23-23.

[^695]: See further on this principle P. CRAIG & G. DE BÚRCA, EU Law.
    Text, cases and materials, 2003, pp. 211ff.

[^696]: See, e.g., J. O. ASCENSÃO, Direito de Autor e Direitos Conexos,
    1992, (hereinafter “ASCENSÃO 1992”), pp. 60ff.

[^697]: ASCENSÃO 1992, pp. 88; , VIEIRA 2005, pp. 458-460.

[^698]: ASCENSÃO 1992, pp. 88-91; VIEIRA 2005, pp. 459-460.

[^699]: VIEIRA 2005, p. 461.

[^700]: Art. 3(2) 2 of the Software Act.

[^701]: Art. 19 of the PCA.

[^702]: Art. 16(1)(a) of the PCA.

[^703]: See arts. 1403-1413 of the Civil Code.

[^704]: Art. 1406 of the Civil Code.

[^705]: Art. 18(2) of the PCA.

[^706]: Art. 3(1)(a) of the PCA.

[^707]: Art. 20 of the PCA.

[^708]: See, for an overview of the regime of derivative and composite
    works, ASCENSÃO 1992, pp. 122ff.

[^709]: Art. 20(2) of the Software Act.

[^710]: Art. 3(3) of the Software Act.

[^711]: For other types of commissioned works or works created by
    employees, the contractor or the employee must give their consent
    for the company who owns the rights to alter the work (art. 15(2) of
    the PCA). However, according to art. 3(5) of the Software Act, that
    rule does not apply to computer programs.

[^712]: See art. 14(4) of the PCA and art. 3(4) of the Software Act.

[^713]: See art. 6(2) of the Software Act.

[^714]: See art. 6 of the Software Directive and art. 7 of the Software
    Act.

[^715]: See art. 10 (1) of the Software Act.

[^716]: See MARQUES & MARTINS, pp. 627-629.

[^717]: See ROCHA & CORDEIRO, pp. 44-45.

[^718]: Ibid. See also ASCENSÃO 1992, p. 168 and A. L. DIAS PEREIRA,
    Direitos de Autor e Liberdade de Informação, Almedina, 2008,
    pp.460-482. Contra, arguing that moral rights can be held by other
    entities, see ALBERTO DE SA E MELLO, Contrato de Direito de Autor: A
    autonomia contratual na formação do direito de autor, Almedina,
    2008, p.572, and L. MENEZES LEITÃO, Direito de Autor, Almedina, 2011
    (hereinafter, “MENEZES LEITÃO 2011”), pp. 148ff. Considering that
    art. 9(1) does not regulate moral rights but instead economic
    rights, see VIEIRA 2005, pp.727ff (arguing that only art. 9(2)
    regulates moral rights).

[^719]: Arts 56 and 62 respectively.

[^720]: ROCHA & CORDEIRO, p. 45, held that the creator of a computer
    program was not entitled to the moral rights granted by the PCA,
    while VIEIRA 2005, pp. 727-730, had the opposite opinion.

[^721]: See decision of the Portuguese Supreme Court of November 29,
    2012 (translation by the authors).

[^722]: MARQUES & MARTINS, p. 631. See art. 56(2) of the PCA.

[^723]: Art. 36(1) of the PCA.

[^724]: Art. 36(2) of the PCA.

[^725]: See art. 11(3) of the Software Act. On analogy, see art. 10(2)
    of the Civil Code.

[^726]: Decree-Law 7/2004, of January 7, as last amended by Law 46/2012,
    of August 29 (hereinafter, the “Electronic Commerce Act”).

[^727]: A.L. DIAS PEREIRA, “Contratos de licenças de software e de bases
    de dados”, in Contratos de Direito de Autor e de Direito Industrial,
    Almedina, 2011, pp. 345-368 (hereinafter, “DIAS PEREIRA 2011”), p.
    351.

[^728]: For an overview of intellectual property rights and the
    application of the Civil Code rules thereto, see C. FERREIRA DE
    ALMEIDA,“Contratos de Propriedade Intelectual. Uma Síntese”, in
    Contratos de Direito de Autor e de Direito Industrial, Almedina,
    2011, pp. 9-24 (hereinafter, “FERREIRA DE ALMEIDA 2011”).

[^729]: See T. BESSA, “Direito de Autor e Licenças (Voluntárias) de
    Exploração da Obra”, Revista da Ordem dos Advogados, Ano 72, IV
    (Separata) (2012), pp. 1129-1242 (hereinafter, “BESSA 2012”),
    pp.1149-1152.

[^730]: See DIAS PEREIRA 2011, pp. 351-352.

[^731]: Specifically, arts 40, 45 to 51 and 55 of the PCA.

[^732]: Arts 45 and 46 of the PCA.

[^733]: Art. 48 of the PCA.

[^734]: ROCHA & CORDEIRO, p. 49; DIAS PEREIRA 2011, p. 352. See contra,
    however, MARQUES & MARTINS, pp. 630-631.

[^735]: However, see BESSA 2012, pp. 1161ff., explaining that the most
    stringent formal requirements might not apply to most copyright
    contracts in light of legal changes to rules applying to public
    deeds, certification and notarial authentication of documents.

[^736]: The term “license” is not typified in any legal instrument,
    covering a broad range of agreements, which means that the “purpose”
    bound interpretation postulated in the Software Act gains a special
    weight - see DIAS PEREIRA 2011, p. 350.

[^737]: See art. 405 of the Civil Code. On the application of this
    principle to copyright license agreements, see J.O. ASCENSÃO, “A
    *Licença* o Direito Intelectual”, in “Contratos de Propriedade
    Intelectual. Uma Síntese”, in Contratos de Direito de Autor e de
    Direito Industrial, Almedina, 2011, pp. 93-112, (hereinafter,
    “ASCENSÃO 2011”), pp. 106ff.

[^738]: MARQUES & MARTINS, pp. 629-630.

[^739]: See DIAS PEREIRA 2011, p. 352.

[^740]: For an overview of this discussion see, inter alia, FERREIRA DE
    ALMEIDA 2011, pp. 17-21, and C. TRABUCO, “O direito de autor e as
    licenças de utilização sobre programas de computador — o contributo
    dos contratos para a compreensão do direito”, in Themis. Revista da
    Faculdade de Direito da Universidade Nova de Lisboa VIII, n. 15,
    2008 (hereinafter, “TRABUCO 2008”), pp. 139-169.

[^741]: See DIAS PEREIRA 2011, pp. 353-354, and BESSA 2012, pp.
    1242-1246.

[^742]: The example is provided by DIAS PEREIRA 2011, pp. 354-355.

[^743]: See TRABUCO 2008, pp. 163-169.

[^744]: Decree-Law 143/2001 (as last amended by Decree-Law 317/2009, of
    October 30), implementing Directive 97/7/EC of the European
    Parliament and of the Council of 20 May 1997 on the protection of
    consumers in respect of distance contracts.

[^745]: Decree-Law 446/85, of October 25 (as last amended by Decree-Law
    323/2001, of December 17), implementing Council Directive 93/13/EEC
    of 5 April 1993 on unfair terms in consumer contracts (hereinafter,
    the “STCA”).

[^746]: Art. 15 of the STCA.

[^747]: Arts 18 and 19 of the STCA.

[^748]: Arts 21 and 22 of the STCA.

[^749]: C. FERREIRA DE ALMEIDA, Direito do Consumo, 2005, pp. 152ff.

[^750]: Art. 18 (b) of the STCA.

[^751]: Art. 18 (c) of the STCA.

[^752]: Art. 18 (e) of the STCA.

[^753]: Art. 18 (h) of the STCA.

[^754]: Art. 19 (a) of the STCA.

[^755]: Art. 19 (b) of the STCA.

[^756]: Art. 19 (c) of the STCA.

[^757]: Art. 21 (a) of the STCA.

[^758]: Art. 21 (b) of the STCA.

[^759]: Art. 21 (e) of the STCA.

[^760]: Art. 22(1) (a) of the STCA.

[^761]: Art. 22(1) (b) of the STCA.

[^762]: Art. 22(1)(j) of the STCA.

[^763]: Art. 22(1)(o) of the STCA.

[^764]: Directive 2004/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the
    Council of 29 April 2004 on the enforcement of intellectual property
    rights (hereinafter, the “Enforcement Directive”). The Enforcement
    Directive was implemented in the PCA through Law 16/2008, of April
    1.

[^765]: See art. 203 of the PCA.

[^766]: See art. 209 of the PCA.

[^767]: These rights are not a consequence of the implementation of the
    Enforcement Directive and can be found in specific sections of the
    PCA, none of which however seems to apply directly to software. See
    MENEZES LEITÃO 2011, pp. 280-282.

[^768]: See arts 210-A and 210-B of the PCA.

[^769]: See arts 210-G, 210-H, 211-B and 227 of the PCA.

[^770]: See arts 201, 210-F, 210-I, 210-J, 211 and 227 of the PCA.

[^771]: For a more detailed analysis, proposing a very similar typology
    to that used in this paragraph, see MENEZES LEITÃO 2011, pp.
    277-297.

[^772]: See art. 210-L of the PCA, implementing Recital 14 of the
    Enforcement Directive.

[^773]: See, in this sense, the reasoning in VIEIRA 2005, pp. 836-841.

[^774]: See art. 13 of the Software Act.

[^775]: This is a partial implementation of art. 7 of the Software
    Directive.

[^776]: See M.L. CARRETAS, “Os Novos Meios de Tutela Preventiva dos
    Direitos de Propriedade Intelectual no Direito Português”, (2008)
    5:3 SCRIPTed 455,
    <http://www.law.ed.ac.uk/ahrc/script-ed/vol5-3/carretas.asp>
    (hereinafter, “CARRETAS 2008”), p. 460.

[^777]: See <http://www.assoft.pt/>.

[^778]: See CARRETAS 2008, pp. 461-62, citing arts. 210-G(2), 210-H(3)
    and 210-F(1) of the PCA (mentioning an “authorized representative”).

[^779]: See ASCENSÃO 2011, p. 107, arguing that fiduciary transmission
    to a collecting society is a violation of public order as it
    excludes an author’s contractual autonomy vis-à-vis his/her work.

[^780]: See art. 57 of the PCA.

[^781]: See art. 14 of the Software Act.

[^782]: Law 109/2009, of September 15 (hereinafter, the “Cybercrime
    Act”).

[^783]: In this sense, see VIEIRA 2005, pp. 838-839. For a critical
    interpretation of this provision, see MARQUES & MARTINS, pp.
    911-916.

[^784]: See art. 8(1) of the Cybercrime Act.

[^785]: See arts 8(3) and 9 of the Cybercrime Act.

[^786]: See art. 10 of the Cybercrime Act.

[^787]: See supra section on “Moral rights”. See art. 1(2) of the
    Software Act. On the standard of author’s own intellectual creation
    and its interpretation by the CJEU, see E. ROSATI, Originality In EU
    Copyright: Full Harmonization through Case Law (Edward Elgar, 2013).

[^788]: A contrario, the use of non-copyrightable software might be
    restricted in specific cases by virtue of contractual stipulations
    or as the result of the applications of legal provisions, e.g. on
    competition law or unfair competition.

[^789]: See art. 38 of the PCA.

[^790]: This would happen in the rare case where the original work was
    not published, its term of protection elapses and a third party
    subsequently causes the software work to be published; in such a
    scenario, the third party will be afforded copyright protection over
    the patrimonial content of the work for a term of 25 years (see arts
    38 and 39(1) of the PCA).

[^791]: See art. 11 of the Software Act and the discussion supra in the
    section “Copyright Contracts”.

[^792]: See art. 3 of the Software Act, covering both software developed
    by employees and software developed on the basis of a work made for
    hire regime.

[^793]: See ASCENSÃO 2011, pp. 98-111, discussing the legal
    qualification of FOSS and arguing, based on the complexity within
    the licensing chain, that FOSS agreements go beyond licenses and
    should be qualified as instances of joint ownership or shared
    ownership (“zur gesamten Hand”). For further development of this
    position, see J.O. ASCENSÃO, “Modelos Colaborativos em Direitos
    Autorais”, in Ensaios sobre o Direito Imaterial — Estudos em
    Homenagem a Newton Silveira, Lumen Juris Editora, Rio de Janeiro,
    2009, pp. 1-18.

[^794]: For an analysis of the general implications of art. 3 of the
    Software Act, see above section “Introduction to software under
    Portuguese Law, Authors/Beneficiaries”.

[^795]: See arts 16(1)(b) and 17 of the PCA. Art. 17(4) excludes from
    consideration as co-authors individuals that have merely assisted in
    the production and dissemination of the work. In the context of
    software, that would cover for example a tester or non-substantial
    bug-fixer.

[^796]: The idea/expression dichotomy results clearly from art. 1 (1)
    and (2) of the PCA.

[^797]: See the above cited art. 17(4) of the PCA.

[^798]: This “consultation” element is an essential element in the
    qualification of a work as “joint”, given that a certain “planned
    and concerted action” of co-authors is required. See ASCENSÃO 1992,
    p. 128. See also MENEZES LEITÃO 2011, p. 110.

[^799]: See art. 5(b) of the Software Act, using the term “derivative
    programs” for software subject to a transformative use.

[^800]: See art. 3(2) of the Software Act, establishing a legal
    presumption (juris tantum) that a work created within a company is a
    collective work. Arts 16(1)(a) and 19 of the PCA establish the
    general regime applying to collective works. It should be noted that
    in traditional commercial software production scenarios the
    application of the provisions in art. 3 will lead to the ownership
    of the copyright in the software being vested in the company or
    employer. See ROCHA & CORDEIRO, pp. 26-28.

[^801]: See art. 3(2) of the Software Act.

[^802]: See art. 16(1)(b) of the PCA.

[^803]: Art. 19(1) of the PCA. See ROCHA & CORDEIRO, at 26-28. See also
    above section “Introduction to software protection under Portuguese
    law, Authors/Beneficiaries”.

[^804]: See art. 19(2) of the PCA, first part.

[^805]: See art. 19(2) of the PCA, final part.

[^806]: Art. 3(3) of the Software Act. See above section “Introduction
    to software protection under Portuguese law, Authors/Beneficiaries”.

[^807]: See art. 16(1)(a) of the of the PCA.

[^808]: These rules can be found in art. 18 of the PCA and are discussed
    below.

[^809]: See art. 17(1) of the PCA. The rules on co-ownership can be
    found in arts 1403-1413 of the Civil Code.

[^810]: See arts 1403-1413 of the Civil Code.

[^811]: See art. 1406 of the Civil Code.

[^812]: See arts 1406 and 985 of the Civil Code.

[^813]: See art. 17(2) of the PCA. This rule is identical to that of
    art. 1403 of the Civil Code.

[^814]: See art. 17(4) of the PCA.

[^815]: See art. 17(3) of the PCA.

[^816]: See arts 18 and 19(2) of the PCA.

[^817]: See art. 18(1) of the PCA.

[^818]: See L. F. REBELLO, Código do Direito de Autor e dos Direitos
    Conexos, Anotado, 3.^a^ ed., Revista e Actualizada, Âncora Editora,
    Lisboa, 2002 (hereinafter, “REBELLO 2002”), p. 62.

[^819]: See art. 18(2) of the PCA.

[^820]: See infra section “Moral Rights in FOSS”. On this topic, see
    also above section “Moral Rights”.

[^821]: See art. 20 of the PCA, using the terminology “composite work”
    (“obra compósita”). The Software Act contains no similar provision,
    although it does prescribe for an exclusive right of transformation
    of the computer program, as well as reproduction of the derivative
    work, under its art. 5(b), which mentions “derivative (computer)
    programs” (“programas derivados”).

[^822]: For composite works, see art. 20(1) of the PCA and, for
    derivative works, see arts 3 of the PCA and 5(b) of the Software
    Act.

[^823]: See art. 20(2) of the PCA.

[^824]: See arts 20(2) of the PCA (mentioning that the right is without
    prejudice of the exclusive rights of the author of the pre-existing
    work) and 5(b) of the Software Act (granting an right of
    reproduction to the owner of the pre-existing work in future uses of
    the derivative work).

[^825]: The copyright holders on the original work don’t obtain any
    rights in the derivative work. They can however, restrict or stop
    the exploitation of the derivative work. See F. DE VISSCHER & B.
    MICHAUX, Precis du droit d’auteur et des droits voisins, Bruylant,
    Brussels, 2000, p. 42.

[^826]: For a discussion of these requirements, see supra the section
    “Copyright Contracts”.

[^827]: For an overview of the FLA see
    <http://fsfe.org/activities/ftf/fla.en.html>. For an analysis of the
    FLA also under Belgian law, see Y. VAN DEN BRANDE, “The Fiduciary
    Licence Agreement: Appointing legal guardians for Free Software
    Projects”, IFOSS L. Rev., Vol 1, Issue 1, p. 9.

[^828]: See arts 72-74 of the PCA, as well as Decree-Law 433/78, of
    December 27 (on the registration of collective management
    organizations), and Law 83/2001, of August 3 (on the constitution,
    organization and functioning of collective management
    organizations).

[^829]: E.g. Belgium. See Y. VAN DEN BRANDE, “Belgium”, The
    International Free and Open Source Software Law Book,
    <http://ifosslawbook.org/belgium/>.

[^830]: See art. 12 of Law 83/2001, of August 3. On the potential
    invalidity of fiduciary transmissions of copyrights from authors to
    collecting societies, see ASCENSÃO 2011, p. 107.

[^831]: See supra section “Copyright Contracts”.

[^832]: See ROCHA & CORDEIRO, pp. 48-50.

[^833]: See supra section “Copyright Contracts” and the discussion on
    the formal requirements of arts 43 and 44 of the PCA.

[^834]: See arts. 43(2) and 43 of the PCA. The legal regime of nullity
    of a legal transaction is set forth in arts 285-294 of the Civil
    Code.

[^835]: See FLA, art. 1(1). See also
    <http://fsfe.org/activities/ftf/fla.en.html>: “Beneficiaries of the
    FLA assign the copyright in their work, and in countries where
    assignments of the copyright in a work are impossible, they grant
    the fiduciary an exclusive license (see §1(1) for details).
    Therefore, the FLA is designed to work in both civil and common law
    countries.”

[^836]: See P. Goldstein & P.B. Hugenholtz, International Copyright.
    Principles, Law, and Practice, Third Edition (New York: Oxford
    University Press 2012), pp. 358-361.

[^837]: See the Clauses 5 and 6 of the Open Source Definition (“OSD”),
    <http://opensource.org/osd>.

[^838]: See supra section “Moral Copyrights”. See also ROCHA & CORDEIRO,
    pp. 44-45.

[^839]: See arts 14(3) and 27-30 of the PCA, regulating moral rights and
    issues related to the name of the author. See also arts 56-62 of the
    PCA regarding specific moral rights.

[^840]: See ROCHA & CORDEIRO, p. 45. Apparently accepting such limited
    interpretation, see DIAS PEREIRA 2011, p. 348.

[^841]: See VIEIRA 2005, pp. 719-741.

[^842]: Id., pp. 736-740.

[^843]: See above the section “Introduction…/ Moral Rights”.

[^844]: See above the section “Copyright Contracts”.

[^845]: Id.

[^846]: Id.

[^847]: Id.

[^848]: An argument to the contrary would likely seek the application to
    FOSS agreements of rules governing the lending (“locação”) agreement
    in arts 1129ff. of the Civil Code. See A.L. DIAS PEREIRA, “Contratos
    de Software”, in Textos de apoio ao Curso de Direito da Comunicação
    no ano lectivo de 1995/1996, A. Pinto Monteiro, Direito dos
    Contratos e da Publicidade, Coimbra, 1996 (hereinafter, “DIAS
    PEREIRA 1996”), p. 117, admitting the possibility of application of
    these agreements to end-user software licenses where the use of the
    software is authorized for free.

[^849]: See: GPL version 1, article 6; GPL version 2, article 6; and GPL
    version 3, article 10.

[^850]: See GPL version 3, article 10. The sections omitted in the
    citation refer to enforcement (first paragraph), “entity
    transaction” (whole second paragraph) and examples on restriction on
    the exercise of rights (part of third paragraph).

[^851]: See arts 217ff. of the Civil Code and, for electronic contracts,
    arts 24-33 of the Electronic Commerce Act.

[^852]: See DIAS PEREIRA 1996, p. 118, noting that the same are subject
    to the STCA. On the STCA, see above the section “Copyright
    Contracts”.

[^853]: See DIAS PEREIRA 1996, pp. 116-120, analyzing the issue from the
    perspective of the STCA. See also DIAS PEREIRA 2011, pp. 366-367,
    referring to both B2B and B2C agreements characterized by the online
    delivery of electronic files with download, and arguing for the
    validity of such agreements, even when based in pre-formulated
    standard terms and conditions.

[^854]: A typical example is provided in M. BAIN, “Spain”, in The
    International Free and Open Source Software Law Book,
    <http://ifosslawbook.org/spain/> (“in the code file header and with
    luck, in a COPYING.txt file or a /legal/ folder”).

[^855]: See Criteria 10 of the OSD, annotated,
    <http://opensource.org/osd-annotated>. Under the criteria that the
    “License Must Be Technology-Neutral”, the OSD notes that “Provisions
    mandating so-called *click-wrap* may conflict with important methods
    of software distribution such as FTP download, CD-ROM anthologies,
    and web mirroring; such provisions may also hinder code re-use”.

[^856]: See art. 24 of the Electronic Commerce Act, which applies to all
    contracts concluded via electronic or computerized means, whether or
    not they are deemed commercial.

[^857]: See art. 29(2) of the Electronic Commerce Act, clarifying that
    in cases of immediate online delivery of the good (i.e. software),
    the consumers' acknowledgement of receipt is not required. See also
    DIAS PEREIRA 2011, p. 367.

[^858]: Unless a legal exception applies.

[^859]: See arts 38-39 of the PCA.

[^860]: See A.L. DIAS PEREIRA, Direitos de Autor e Liberdade de
    Informação, Almedina, 2008, pp. 582-584, discussing the minimum
    rights of the legitimate software user and noting that even the
    private use of software requires, in principle, a license granted
    directly or indirectly by the rights holder.

[^861]: The same is true, e.g., for Spain. See M. BAIN, “Spain”, in The
    International Free and Open Source Software Law Book,
    <http://ifosslawbook.org/spain/>.

[^862]: Some doubts arise in connection with the fact that FOSS licenses
    are in English. Here, a distinction between professionals and
    consumers is required. For the first, it is also a use and custom of
    the sector that vast majority of technical documentation is in
    English, meaning that courts may accept that use of English language
    for the license is acceptable. As regards the second, no such
    argument is valid.

[^863]: See art. 41(2) of the PCA. See considerations above in sections
    “Copyright Contracts” and “Enforcing FOSS Licenses, General
    Considerations” on the potential application of art. 41 (and rules
    of formal requirements) to software agreements.

[^864]: See decisions from the Portuguese Supreme Court of April 21,
    1988, December 15, 1998, March 3, 2006, and July 1, 2008. For the
    legal scholarship, see: REBELLO 2002, pp. 85-86; A.M. VITORINO, A
    Eficácia dos Contratos de Direito de Autor, Almedina, 1995, pp.
    27-28; and BESSA 2012, pp.1184ff.

[^865]: See art. 220 of the Civil Code. For an overview of the arguments
    of this section of the legal scholarship, see BESSA 2012, pp.1184ff.

[^866]: On the difficulty of distinguishing contractual breaches of
    copyright license agreements that translate into copyright
    infringement (because they impact on the core of the exclusive
    right) from those that merely translate into contractual liability,
    see ASCENSÃO 2011, pp. 1101-112.

[^867]: See arts 195-211-B of the PCA.

[^868]: See e.g., the BSD license
    (<http://www.opensource.org/licenses/bsd-license>) and Clauses 15
    (Disclaimer of Warranty) and 16 (Limitation of Liability) of the GPL
    version 3.

[^869]: B. PERENS, “The Open Source Definition”, Open Sources: Voices
    from the Open Source Revolution,
    <http://www.virtualblueness.net/os/perens.html>.

[^870]: The GPL expressly allows this (GPL version 2, art. 11; GPL
    version 3, art. 7).

[^871]: See art. 809 of the Civil Code.

[^872]: See art. 800(2) of the Civil Code.

[^873]: Such rules are found mostly in arts 15-23 of the STCA. See above
    section “Copyright Contracts”.

[^874]: See arts 18(a), (b), (c) and (d) of the STCA. These rules apply
    also to contracts with consumers ex vi art. 20 of the STCA.

[^875]: See A. PINTO MONTEIRO, “A responsabilidade civil na negociação
    informática”, pp. 229-239, Direito da Sociedade da Informação I,
    Coimbra Editora - 1999, p. 238.

[^876]: See art. 16 of Decree-Law 10/2013, of January 28 (hereinafter,
    the “Consumer Protection Act”).

[^877]: Decree-Law 67/2003, of April 8 (as amended by Decree-Law
    84/2008, of May 21) (hereinafter, the “Sale of Consumer Goods Act”).

[^878]: See art. 1-B(d) of the Sale of Consumer Goods Act.

[^879]: For a discussion on this topic, see T. ENGELHARDT & T. JAEGER,
    “Germany”, in The International Free and Open Source Software Law
    Book, <http://ifosslawbook.org/germany/>.

[^880]: See arts 1-A(2) and 1-B(c) of the Sale of Consumer Goods Act.

[^881]: See art. 1-B(b) of the Sale of Consumer Goods Act. A similar
    definition of product (movable good) is found in art. 3 of Law
    383/89, of Nov. 6 (last amended by Decree-Law 131/2001, of April
    24), implementing Council Directive 85/374/EEC of 25 July 1985 on
    the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative
    provisions of the Member States concerning liability for defective
    products (hereinafter, the “Liability for Defective Products Act”).
    As such, the scope of this law does not extend beyond physical
    goods, and it would be extremely debatable to consider FOSS licenses
    covered thereby. Moreover, as noted above, the qualification of a
    FOSS license as a sale (or even lease) agreement, triggering the
    application of these provisions, is also arguable.See above section
    “Copyright Contracts”.

[^882]: See art. 3(2) of the Sale of Consumer Goods Act.

[^883]: See art. 4(1) of the Sale of Consumer Goods Act.

[^884]: See, in general, arts 798ff. of the Civil Code. See also art.
    12(1) of the Consumer Protection Act, which provides an identical
    mandatory right for defective services.

[^885]: See art. 10(1) of the Sale of Consumer Goods Act and the broader
    art. 16 of the Consumer Protection Act.

[^886]: See art. 3(2) of the Sale of Consumer Goods Act.

[^887]: See art. 914 of the Civil Code.

[^888]: See arts 905 and 908-909 of the Civil Code, applicable ex vi
    art. 913(1) of the same diploma.

[^889]: See art. 6 of the Sale of Consumer Goods Act.

[^890]: See art. 6(1) of the Sale of Consumer Goods Act.

[^891]: See art. 12(1) of the Consumer Protection Act.

[^892]: See art. 12(2) of the Consumer Protection Act.

[^893]: Art. 16 of the Consumer Protection Act.

[^894]: This law has a similar concept of producer to that of the Sale
    of Consumer Goods Act.

[^895]: See arts. 1 and 4 of the Liability for Defective Products Act.
    Art. 3 defines products as movable goods, thus raising the same
    question vis-à-vis the applicability of this legal regime to FOSS
    licenses, as discussed above for the definition of consumer goods
    under the Sale of Consumer Goods Act.

[^896]: See art. 8(c) of the Liability for Defective Products Act.

[^897]: See art. 5 of the Liability for Defective Products Act.

[^898]: See art. 5(c) of the Liability for Defective Products Act.

[^899]: See art. 10 of the Liability for Defective Products Act.

[^900]: Although it is arguable that the Sale of Consumer Goods Act and
    the Liability for Defective Products Act do not apply to FOSS
    licenses, this issue as not been discussed in Portuguese case law
    and may vary in accordance with the specific context under which a
    FOSS license is provided.

[^901]: See GPL version 3, art. 17 (“Interpretation of Sections 15 and
    16”): If the disclaimer of warranty and limitation of liability
    provided above cannot be given local legal effect according to their
    terms, reviewing courts shall apply local law that most closely
    approximates an absolute waiver of all civil liability in connection
    with the Program, unless a warranty or assumption of liability
    accompanies a copy of the Program in return for a fee.

[^902]: See arts 292 and 293 of the Civil Code on reduction and
    conversion of invalid provisions.

[^903]: Neither the principles (freedoms) of the Free Software movement,
    nor the OSD mandate the copyleft clause. Several FOSS licenses don’t
    contain a copyleft clause. Examples are the Berkeley Software
    Distribution (BSD) license and the Apache license.

[^904]: E.g., GPL version 3, art. 5, and GPL version 2, art. 2(b).

[^905]: See e.g., M. OLSON, “Dual Licensing”, in Open Sources 2.0: The
    Continuing Evolution (Ed. C., DiBona, D., Cooper and M., Stone),
    O’Reilly, 2006 (hereinafter, “OLSON 2006”).

[^906]: See infra section “Damages”.

[^907]: See arts 3, 20, 67, 68 (maxime 68(2)(g) and (h)), all of the
    PCA.

[^908]: See arts 3, 20, 40(a), 41 67, 68 (maxime art. 68(2)(g) and (h)),
    all of the PCA.

[^909]: See, in a similar sense, ASCENSÃO 2011, p. 99.

[^910]: See art. 334 of the Civil Code.

[^911]: The GPL version 3 stipulates otherwise. The OSD prohibits this
    under clause 9.

[^912]: See art. 405 of the Civil Code.

[^913]: See Law 19/2012, of May 8, in particular art. 11(1) and (2)(d),
    potentially applying to tying and bundling (similar to art.
    101(1)(e) of the TFEU). For a brief overview of the relationship of
    intellectual property contracts with competition law, see FERREIRA
    DE ALMEIDA 2011, pp. 21-23. For a more detailed overview on the
    intersection between intellectual property contracts and competition
    law, see C. TRABUCO & I. F. de OLIVEIRA, “Contratos de Direito da
    Propriedade Intelectual e Direito da Concorrência”, in Contratos de
    Direito de Autor e de Direito Industrial, Almedina, 2011, pp.
    127-156.

[^914]: See above sections “Copyright Contracts” and “Enforcing FOSS
    Licenses”.

[^915]: See arts 8 of the Software Act and 68(5) of the PCA.

[^916]: CJEU, Case C-128/11, UsedSoft GmbH v Oracle International Corp.

[^917]: These can be found, inter alia, in arts 483ff.
    (non-contractual), 798ff (contractual) and 227 (pre-contractual) of
    the Civil Code.

[^918]: See TRIGO, M. DA GRAÇA, Responsabilidade Civil por Violação de
    Direito Intelectual, in Direito da Sociedade da Informação X, pp.
    151-169, 2012 (hereinafter, “TRIGO 2012”), p. 159.

[^919]: See arts. 483 of the Civil Code and 211(1) of the PCA.

[^920]: The nature of infringer’s profits as an economic or non-economic
    damage under Portuguese law is a debated topic among legal
    scholarship. For a brief summary of that debate, see TRIGO 2012, pp.
    160-162.

[^921]: These include most expenses and costs with protection of
    copyright, such as those with investigation of the infringement and
    cease and desist thereof.

[^922]: See art. 211(2) of the PCA. Art. 211(3) contains a narrow
    concretization of this general principle on economic damages, and is
    of no consequence in the FOSS context.

[^923]: See TRIGO 2012, pp.162-163.

[^924]: See art. 496(3), and its articulation with art. 494, both of the
    Civil Code.

[^925]: We follow here the same reasoning of TRIGO 2012, p. 163.

[^926]: See art. 211(5) of the PCA. This second requirement, which finds
    no basis in the Enforcement Directive, seems difficult to
    understand. See TRIGO 2012, p.164.

[^927]: See art. 211(5) of the PCA.

[^928]: See TRIGO 2012, p.164.

[^929]: This presents a clear parallel to the absence of reference to
    “moral damages” in art. 13(1)(b) of the Enforcement Directive.

[^930]: Arguing this position, see TRIGO 2012, p.165.

[^931]: See TRIGO 2012, p.165.

[^932]: See art. 15 of the Software Act. See also R. SAAVEDRA, A
    protecção jurídica do software e a Internet, Lisboa, Sociedade
    Portuguesa de Autores, Publicações Dom Quixote, 1998, pp. 307-312

[^933]: See e.g. C. DIBONA, D. COOPER & M. STONE, “Introduction”, in
    Open Sources 2.0: The Continuing Evolution (Ed. C., DiBona, D.,
    Cooper and M., Stone), O’Reilly, 2006.

[^934]: Add-ons are additions to the free work to which the author
    reserves all rights, and which can only be used against payment.

[^935]: See e.g. OLSON 2006, p.35.

[^936]: Copyright Act No. 98 of 1978

[^937]: The Patents Act of 57 of 1978 stipulates in Section 25 (2)
    “Anything which consists of— … (f) a program for a computer; ..shall
    not be an invention for the purposes of this Act.”

[^938]: Bob Joliffe ‘The word-processing patent - a sceptical view from
    a person having ordinary skill in the art’ South African Computer
    Journal (2005) 25, 2

[^939]: The other Roman Dutch common law jurisdictions are Lesotho,
    Botswana, Swaziland, Zimbabwe and Sri Lanka.

[^940]: Certification of the Constitution of the Republic of South
    Africa, \[1996\] ZACC 26 §75

[^941]: Computer Programs are defined in section 1 of the Copyright Act
    98 of 1978: LDQUOLSQUOcomputer programLSQUO means a set of
    instructions fixed or stored in any manner and which, when used
    directly or indirectly in a computer, directs its operation to bring
    about a result; (d) a computer program includes - (i) a version of
    the program in a programming language, code or notation different
    from that of the program; or (ii) a fixation of the program in or on
    a medium different from the medium of fixation of the program;RDQUO

[^942]: Haupt t/a Softcopy v Brewers Marketing Intelligence (Pty) Ltd.
    and Others (118/05) \[2006\] ZASCA 40 §24

[^943]: Section 1 of the Copyright Act

[^944]: Section 2 (2) of the Copyright Act stipulates: “A work, except a
    broadcast or programme-carrying signal, shall not be eligible for
    copyright unless the work has been written down, recorded,
    represented in digital data or signals or otherwise reduced to a
    material form”

[^945]: Gallo Africa Ltd v Sting Music (Pty) Ltd 2010 (6) SA 329 (SCA)

[^946]: Section 1 of the Copyright Act: LDQUOLSQUOauthorRSQUO, in
    relation to - (i) a computer program, the person who exercised
    control over the making of the computer programRDQUO

[^947]: Section 21 (1) (a) of the Copyright Act

[^948]: Section 21 (1) (d) of the Copyright Act stipulates “Section 21
    (d) Where in a case not falling within either paragraph (b) or (c) a
    work is made in the course of the author’s employment by another
    person under a contract of service or apprenticeship, that other
    person shall be the owner of any copyright subsisting in the work by
    virtue of section 3 or 4.”

[^949]: King v South African Weather Services \[2008\] ZASCA 143

[^950]: Section 21 (1) (e) of the Copyright Act

[^951]: Haupt t/a Softcopy v Brewers Marketing Intelligence (Pty) Ltd.
    and Others (118/05) \[2006\] ZASCA 40 §41; 2006 (4) SA 458 (SCA)

[^952]: Roux de Villiers ‘Computer Programs and Copyright: The South
    African Perspective’ (2006) SALJ 123 315-337 at 324

[^953]: Section 22(5) of the Copyright Act

[^954]: Section 5(2) states that works made under direction or control
    of the State or prescribed international organization can be
    eligible for copyright while section 21 (2) states that copyright
    shall vest in the State or prescribed international organization.

[^955]: Section 21 of the State Information Technology Agency Act No.88
    of 1998.

[^956]: Section 1 definition of ‘author’ (h) of the Copyright Act

[^957]: The term publication is defined in section 1(5) of the Copyright
    Act to include issuing the work to the public in sufficient
    quantities to reasonably meet the needs of the public. Depending on
    how ‘diffusion service’ is interpreted it might also cover online
    distribution but since publication is defined so as to exclude
    transmission in a diffusion service a finding that online
    distribution is transmission in a diffusion service would have the
    result that online distribution is not publishing.

[^958]: Section 1 (2A) of the Copyright Act

[^959]: Section 1 (1) definition of adaptation (d), the Copyright Act
    goes on to define a copy of a computer program as including an
    adaptation.

[^960]: Section 1 (1) definition of reproduction of the Copyright Act

[^961]: Section 2 (3) of the Copyright Act

[^962]: Section 1(1) definition of performance of the Copyright Act

[^963]: The rights of publication and transmission in a diffusion
    service affect distribution

[^964]: Section 19B(2) of the Copyright Act

[^965]: Section 19B (1) read with Section 12 (1) (b) and (c), (2), (3),
    (4), (5), (12) and (13)

[^966]: Section 20.

[^967]: Only copyright, that is the exclusive economic rights vesting in
    a copyright holder, may be transferred according to section 22 of
    the Copyright Act, moral rights remain vested in authors
    “notwithstanding the transfer of copyright” (section 20)

[^968]: Section 22(3) of the Copyright Act

[^969]: Section 1(1) of the Copyright Act: LDQUOLSQUOwritingRSQUO
    includes any form of notation, whether by hand or by printing,
    typewriting or any similar processRDQUO and section 12 of the
    Electronic Communications and Transactions Act No.25 of 2002
    stipulates “A requirement in law that a document or information must
    be in writing is met if the document or information is- a. in the
    form of a data message; and b. accessible in a manner usable for
    subsequent reference.”

[^970]: Section 13(1) of the Electronic Communications Transactions Act
    No.25 of 2002.

[^971]: Section 22(4) of the Copyright Act

[^972]: Tana Pistorius ‘Developing countries and copyright in the
    information age – the functional equivalent implementation of the
    WCT’ (2006) 2 *Potchefstroom Electronic Law Journal* 1-21

[^973]: Electronic Communications and Transactions Act 25 of 2002
    section 86.

[^974]: Section 23(2) of the Copyright Act

[^975]: Section 28 of the Copyright Act.

[^976]: Counterfeit Goods Act 37 of 1997

[^977]: Section 22 (4) of the Copyright Act.

[^978]: Bloom v American Swiss Watch Co. 1915 AD 100 and Withok Small
    Farms (Pty) Ltd v Amber Sunrise Properties 5 (Pty) \[2008\] ZASCA
    131

[^979]: When an owner brings suit he must give notice to an exclusive
    licensee.

[^980]: Injunctions are referred to as interdicts in South African law.

[^981]: Section 24(1) of the Copyright Act

[^982]: Feldman v EMI Music \[2009\] ZASCA 75 (1 June 2009)

[^983]: There are both common law and statutory procedures. The common
    law ‘Anton Piller’ order is definitively discussed in Shoba v
    Officer Commanding, Temporary Police Camp, Wagendrift Dam; Maphanga
    v Officer Commanding South African Police Murder and Robbery Unit,
    Pietermaritzburg \[1995\] ZASCA 49, while the statutory procedure is
    set out in section 11 of the Counterfeit Goods Act 37 of 1997.

[^984]: Section 24 (2) of the Copyright Act

[^985]: Haupt t/a Softcopy v Brewers Marketing Intelligence (Pty) Ltd.
    and Others (118/05) \[2006\] ZASCA 40 §45

[^986]: Official State Bulletin (BOE) Nº 97 of 22/April/1996. Last
    amended by Law 23/2006 of 7 July. While the name in Spanish is “Ley
    de Propiedad Intelectual”, which confusingly seems to refer to the
    concept of Intellectual Property, a more correct translation of
    “Propiedad Intelectual” is Copyright (and neighbouring rights), and
    this is the name we are using.

[^987]: Copyright Act, Art. 95.

[^988]: Copyright Act, Art.10: “Are object o copyright any *original*
    literary, artistic or scientific works…”

[^989]: Implementing Art. 1.3 of the EC Software Directive. Real
    Marquez, M: *The requirements of originality in Copyright*, UAIPIT,
    December 2001.

[^990]: Copyright Act, Art. 96.4.

[^991]: Copyright Act, Art.1 (also Arts. 2, 14 and 17 and for computer
    programs, Art. 97.1).

[^992]: Copyright Act, Art. 97.4.

[^993]: Castro Bonilla, A: “Autoría y Titularidad en el derecho de
    autor”, <http://www.informatica-juridica.com/> (last visited,
    01.08.2010).

[^994]: Copyright Act, Arts. 7 and 97.3.

[^995]: Copyright Act, Arts. 8 and 97.2.

[^996]: Copyright Act, Art. 9.

[^997]: Copyright Act, Art. 19.

[^998]: Copyright Act, Art. 100.5. The authorization of the rightholder
    shall not be required where reproduction of the code and translation
    of its form within the meaning of article 99, a) and b) are
    indispensable to obtain the information necessary to achieve the
    interoperability of an independently created computer program with
    other programs, provided that the following conditions are met: a)
    the reproduction or translation is performed by a person having a
    right to use a copy of the program, or on his behalf by a person
    authorized to do so; b) the information necessary to achieve
    interoperability has not previously been readily and easily
    available to the person referred to in subparagraph a); c) the
    reproduction and the translation are confined to the parts of the
    original program which are necessary to achieve interoperability.
    Art. 100.6. The exception of the paragraph 5 above shall only apply
    provided information obtained in this manner: a) is only used to
    achieve the interoperability of the independently created computer
    program; b) is only communicated to third parties when necessary for
    the interoperability of the independently created computer program;
    c) is not be used to develop, produce or market a computer program
    that is substantially similar in its expression, or for any other
    acts which infringe copyright. Art. 100.7. The provisions of this
    article may not be interpreted in such a way as to allow its
    application to be used in a manner which unreasonably prejudices to
    rightholders legitimate interests or conflicts with a normal
    exploitation of the computer program. (unofficial translation by the
    author)

[^999]: In application of Article 6bis 1 of the Berner Convention. See
    also Preinfalk Lavagni, I: *El derecho moral del autor de programas
    infromáticos*, Tirant Monografías, 2010.

[^1000]: The Copyright Act also contains the right moral right to make
    the work known to the public.

[^1001]: Copyright Act, Art. 14, first line.

[^1002]: Copyright Act, Art. 98.2.

[^1003]: Copyright Act, Arts. 42 and 43.

[^1004]: Copyright Act, Art 45.

[^1005]: See e.g. Galán Corona, “La protección jurídica del software”,
    Noticias / CEE, Valencia, Ed CISS Nº73, Año VII, February 1991.

[^1006]: See Ribas Alejandro, J: “Protección de los Programas de
    Ordenador”, in Informática y Derecho, Merida, Ed. UNED, Nº 9, 10 and
    11, 1996. Delgado Echevarría, J: *Comentario a la Sentencia del 12
    de diciembre del 1988*, in CCJC, Madrid, Ed. Civitas Nº 18, sept-dic
    1988. This is reinforced by Copyright Act, Art. 99, last paragraph,
    applied by analogy, which states that unless otherwise stated, the
    transfer of a use right in the software is deemed non-exclusive,
    non-transferable and only to satisfy the needs of the user.

[^1007]: Ródriguez Tapia (Ed), *Comentarios a la Ley de Propiedad
    Intelectual*, “La Cesión”.

[^1008]: Copyright Act, Art. 99 last paragraph.

[^1009]: Copyright Act, Art. 44.

[^1010]: In line with the Software Directive.

[^1011]: Spanish Penal Code, Art. 270. Note that the technical
    protection measures do not have to be “effective”.

[^1012]: Rodríguez Tapia, “Artículo 10 TRLPI”, in *Comentarios a la Ley
    de Propiedad Intelectual*, op cit, p. 56.

[^1013]: Copyright Act, Art. 41.

[^1014]: Nonius, J. (2002). *Introducción a las licencias de software
    libre*. Online now at
    <http://campusvirtual.unex.es/cala/epistemowikia/images/d/d2/Introducci%C3%B3n_a_la_propiedad_intelectual_%28por_Jorge_Nonius%2C_20_de_abril_de_2002%29.pdf>
    (last visited 10.02.2011).

[^1015]: Such as software developed by employees (Copyright Act, Art.
    96), and software developed for hire under a contractual transfer of
    copyrights.

[^1016]: Carrasco Perrera, A, *Comentario al Artículo 7 TRPLI*, en
    Bercovitz Rodríguez Cano, R (Coordinador) *Comentarios a la ley de
    propiedad Intelectual*, op cit, p. 124.

[^1017]: Case 24th July 1995, Audiencia Provincial de Valencia (Civil).

[^1018]: Bercovitz Rodriguez Cano, R: *Comentarios a la Ley de Propiedad
    Intelectual*, 3rd Ed, 2007, p.114 ss.

[^1019]: Case 17th December 1998, Audiencia Provincial of Asturias,
    Section 5 (Civil).

[^1020]: Bercovitz Rodriguez Cano, R: op cit, p. 136 ss.

[^1021]: “Comunidades de bien”, Spanish Civil Code, Arts. 392 ss.

[^1022]: Bercovitz Rodriguez Cano, R: op cit, p. 134 ss.

[^1023]: Copyright Act, Art. 4, al. 2.

[^1024]: J. Miquel, in Bercovitz Rodriguez Cano, op cit, pp. 139-140.

[^1025]: The copyright holders on the original work don’t obtain any
    rights in the derivative work. They can however, restrict or stop
    the exploitation of the derivative work (Art 9, Copyright Act).

[^1026]: FSFE (Free Software Foundation Europe) recommends that
    developers of Free Software projects use its Fiduciary License
    Agreement (FLA) to assign their rights to a fiduciary (preferably
    the FSFE). For an analysis of the FLA also under Belgian law, see
    Y., VAN DEN BRANDE, “The Fiduciary Licence Agreement: Appointing
    legal guardians for Free Software Projects”, IFOSS L. Rev., Vol 1,
    Issue 1, p. 9.

[^1027]: An analogy is the right of collecting societies to take action
    in respect of the rights they manage.

[^1028]: Creative Commons tried to solve the moral rights issue when
    transposing the — original American --- licenses to local law.
    Xalabarder Plantada, R: *Las licencias Creative Commons: ¿una
    alternativa al copyright?*; UOC Papers. N.º 2. UOC.
    <http://www.uoc.edu/uocpapers/2/dt/esp/xalabarder.pdf> (last visited
    10.02.2011).

[^1029]: OSD Clause 5.

[^1030]: OSD Clausule 6. Bruce Perens indicates, e.g., that an author of
    FOSS cannot provide a clause that prohibits the use of the software
    by regimes such as the former South African apartheids regime (B.,
    PERENS, “The FOSS Definition”, <http://perens.com/OSD.html>).

[^1031]: See above, [section\_title](#sec_spain_moralrights).

[^1032]: As an example, the Fiduciary License Agreemet of FSFE expressly
    stipulates that it leaves the moral and/or personal rights of the
    author unaffected (FLA §1 (2)).

[^1033]: Rodríguez Tapía, JM, in Rodríguez Tapía, op cit, *Comentarios*,
    p. 407 and Gete Alonso y Carrera, Mª del Carmen, in Bercovitz
    Rodríguez Cano, op cit, p. 765. This is based on both the wording of
    the Copyright Act as to licenses (“cesiones”, in Articles 42-50),
    and the Spanish Civil Code as to obligations — license conditions
    being seen as obligations imposed on the licensee by the
    rightsholder.

[^1034]: See above on “Authors/Beneficiaries”.

[^1035]: See above, “Authors of derivative / composed FOSS works”.

[^1036]: GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE (GPL) version 3, article 10,
    <http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html>.

[^1037]: GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE (GPL) version 2, article 6,
    <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/old-licenses/gpl-2.0.html>.

[^1038]: Spanish Civil Code, Arts. 1254 ss.

[^1039]: Aurelio López-Tarruella Martínez: *Contratos internacionales de
    software*, Editorial Tirant Lo Blanch. Barriuso Ruiz, C: *La
    Contratación Electrónica*, Dykinson 1998, p. 161. RUIZ PERIS,
    (Dir.): *Oferta, perfección y prueba del contrato electrónico*, in
    “Nuevas formas contractuales y el incremento del endeudamiento
    familiar”, Madrid: Consejo General del Poder Judicial, 2004, pp.
    215-242.

[^1040]: This created signficant debate within the Debian community when
    Mozilla Foundation required acceptance of the Firefox/Thunderbird
    end user license as part of the installation process, and thus led
    to the creation of a fork, Iceweasel.

[^1041]: OSD Criteria 10, online at <http://opensource.org/docs/osd>.

[^1042]: Unless a legal exception applies.

[^1043]: They may be some doubt as to certainty, as the FOSS licenses
    are in English, however it is also a use and custom of the sector
    that most technical documentation is in English, thus a court may
    accept that use of English language for the license is acceptable.
    This would not apply to consumer licensees.

[^1044]: See [section\_title](#sec_spain_legalprocedures) below.

[^1045]: See e.g., the BSD license
    (<http://www.opensource.org/licenses/bsd-license>): THIS SOFTWARE IS
    PROVIDED BY &lt;copyright holder&gt; “AS IS” AND ANY EXPRESS OR
    IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
    WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
    ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL &lt;copyright holder&gt; BE LIABLE
    FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
    CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
    SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR
    BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF
    LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING
    NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS
    SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

[^1046]: B., PERENS, “The Open Source Definition”, *Open Sources: Voices
    from the Open Source Revolution*, <http://perens.com/OSD.html> (last
    visited 10.02.2011).

[^1047]: See e.g., M., OLSON, “Dual Licensing”, in *Open Sources 2.0:
    The Continuing Evolution* (Ed. C., DiBona, D., Cooper and M.,
    Stone), O’Reilly, 2006, p. 35.

[^1048]: The GNU General Public License expressly allows this (GPL v. 2,
    art. 11; GPL v. 3, art. 7).

[^1049]: “Goce pacífico” by analogy with rental agreements, under
    Spanish Civil Code, Article 1552.

[^1050]: To this extent, the EUPL establishes that the work is “in
    development” and not finished.

[^1051]: Many FOSS projects would not be seen as “sellers”.

[^1052]: Spanish Civil Code, Art. 1486.

[^1053]: RDL 1/2007 on Consumer Protection, Arts. 82 et seq.

[^1054]: RDL 1/2007 on Consumer Protection, Art. 114 et seq, and in
    particular Art. 115.

[^1055]: Neither the principles (freedoms) of the Free Software
    movement, nor the Open Source Definition mandate the copyleft
    clause. Several FOSS licenses don’t contain a copyleft clause.
    Examples of permissive (non copyleft) licenses are the modified
    Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD) license and the Apache 2.0
    license.

[^1056]: E.g., GPL version 3, Art. 5 stipulates: “You must license the
    entire work, as a whole, under this License to anyone who comes into
    possession of a copy. This License will therefore apply, along with
    any applicable section 7 additional terms, to the whole of the work,
    and all its parts, regardless of how they are packaged. This License
    gives no permission to license the work in any other way, but it
    does not invalidate such permission if you have separately received
    it”. GPL version 2, Art. 2 b stipulates: “You must cause any work
    that you distribute or publish, that in whole or in part contains or
    is derived from the Program or any part thereof, to be licensed as a
    whole at no charge to all third parties under the terms of this
    License”.

[^1057]: See e.g., M., OLSON, “Dual Licensing”, in *Open Sources 2.0:
    The Continuing Evolution* (Ed. C., DiBona, D., Cooper and M.,
    Stone), O’Reilly, 2006.

[^1058]: See “Damages” below.

[^1059]: Copyright Act, Article 99.b.

[^1060]: Bercovitz Rodríguez Cano, op cit, pp. 1349 et seq.

[^1061]: Copyright Act, Article 43: “licenses are limited to the right
    or rights expressly granted, the modes of use expressly provided and
    the time and territory which are determined”. To be read in line
    with Article 1.255 of the Spanish Civil Code regarding the autonomy
    of contracting parties to determine the conditions of contract,
    subject to other laws, morality and public order.

[^1062]: Spanish Civil Code, Article 1.255. See Mª del Carmen
    Gente-Alonso, in Bercovitz Rodríguez Cano (Ed), “Comentarios” op
    cit, p. 772.

[^1063]: Note that the Open Source Definition prohibits this under
    criteria 9.

[^1064]: Ley 15/2007 de 3 de julio de Defensa de Competencia (e.g. Art.
    2.2.e, on bundling in certain conditions)

[^1065]: Copyright Act, Art. 99 in fin. See also Software Directive,
    Art. 4, c.

[^1066]: E.g. Decisions of 21st February and 8th May 2008, Audiencia
    Provincial de Madrid, or Decision 28th of July 2009, A.P. Guipúzcoa.

[^1067]: Law 1/2000, 7th January 2000.

[^1068]: “Brussels Regulation” Reg. (EC) No. 44/2001 on Jurisdictional
    Competency, and “Rome I adn II Regulations”, Reg. (EC) No. 593/2008
    and Reg. (EC) No. 864/2007 respectively.

[^1069]: Spanish Criminal Code, Fundamental Law 10/1995, as amended,
    Articles 270-272.

[^1070]: Article 1902 of the Spanish Civil Code for breach of
    non-contractual obligations (negligence, wilful misconduct) and 1101
    for contractual obligations.

[^1071]: This is in line with Arts. 13 and 14, IPR Enforcement Directive
    2004/48/EC.

[^1072]: Copyright Act, Art. 140.1.

[^1073]: Copyright Act, Art. 103.

[^1074]: See e.g. C., DIBONA, D., COOPER and M., STONE, “Introduction”,
    in *Open Sources 2.0: The Continuing Evolution* (Ed. C., DiBona, D.,
    Cooper and M., Stone), O’Reilly, 2006.

[^1075]: Extensions or additions to the free work to which the author
    reserves all rights, and which can only be used against payment.

[^1076]: See e.g. M., OLSON, “Dual Licensing”, in *Open Sources 2.0: The
    Continuing Evolution* (Ed. C., DiBona, D., Cooper and M., Stone),
    O’Reilly, 2006, p. 35.

[^1077]: Swiss Federal Act on copyright and neighboring rights Swiss
    Copyright Act (or SCA) — RS 231.1.

[^1078]: Section 2, paragraph 3 SCA: “Computer programs (software) are
    also considered as works”.

[^1079]: D. Barrelet / W.Egloff, Le nouveau droit d’auteur, Commentaire
    de la Loi Fédérale sur le droit d’auteur et les droits voisins, 3rd
    ed., Berne 2008, 2 No. 23; ATF 125 III 263, 269.

[^1080]: Message from the Federal Council, FF 1989 III p. 488 ; V.
    Salvadé, La protection du support multimédia au regard du droit
    d’auteur, in Semaine Judiciaire (SJ) 1996, p. 258.

[^1081]: E. Neff / M. Arn, Uhreberrechtlicher Schutz des Software, in:
    Schweizerisches Immaterialgüter- und Wettbewerbsrecht, II/2, p.
    121ss.

[^1082]: F. Dessemontet, Le droit d’auteur, Lausanne 1999, p. 84ss.

[^1083]: See in particular the Open Source Definition of the Open Source
    Initiative (<http://www.opensource.org/docs/osd>) and the GNU GPL
    vers. 3 (<http://www.opensource.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.html>).

[^1084]: See Section 2, paragraph 1 SCA : “A work is understood,
    whatever its value or purpose may be, as any creation of the mind,
    whether literary or artistic, that has an individual character”.

[^1085]: Message from the Federal Council of June 19, 1989, FF1989 III
    465, ad p. 508.

[^1086]: “AUTO-CAD” case, Revue Suisse de Propriété Intellectuelle
    (RSPI) 1989, p. 58.

[^1087]: ATF 113 II 196; Message from the Federal Council of June 19,
    1989, FF1989 III 465, ad p. 508.

[^1088]: The applicable rules of unfair competition can be found in the
    Federal Act on Unfair Competition (UCA) of December 19, 1986, RS
    241.

[^1089]: F. Dessemontet, Commentaire romand Propriété Intellectuelle,
    Lausanne 2013, LDA 2N 63.

[^1090]: M. J. Widmer, Open Source Software — Uhreberrechtliche Aspekte
    freier Software, Bern 2003, p. 44.

[^1091]: Free and Open Source Software is software subject to an Open
    Source license; See definition below in II.1.

[^1092]: Section 6 SCA : “The author is the natural person who created
    the work”.

[^1093]: Section 9 SCA : “The author has the exclusive right on his/her
    work and the right to be credited as its author” ; Barrelet /
    Egloff, Le nouveau droit d’auteur, 17 No. 2.

[^1094]: Section 201 (a) of the US Copyright Act of 1976, Pub. L.
    94-553, 90 Stat. 2541, as amended through July 1, 200;, Community
    for Creative Non-Violence v. Reid, 490 U.S. 730, 109 S.Ct. 2166, 104
    L.Ed.2d 811 (1989).

[^1095]: Section 7, paragraph 1 SCA : “When several persons have
    contributed in their capacity as authors, the copyright belongs to
    them jointly” ; Barrelet / Egloff, Le nouveau droit d’auteur, 7 No.
    4.

[^1096]: Case 4A\_638/2009 “Guide Orange” from the Swiss Supreme Court
    from April 1st, 2010, paragraph 4.3.

[^1097]: ATF 129 III 715, JdT 2004, p. 271, cons. 3.1.

[^1098]: Section 7, paragraph 2 in fine SCA.

[^1099]: Section 7, paragraph 3 SCA ; Case 4C.138/2003 “Malbuner II” of
    the Swiss Supreme Court, sic ! 2004.

[^1100]: ATF 129 III 715, JdT 2004, p. 271, cons. 3.2.

[^1101]: Swiss Code of Obligations (or SCO) — RO 27 321.

[^1102]: Section 17 SCA : “The employer is the only one authorized to
    exercise the exclusive rights of use on software created by the
    worker in the performance of his/her activities at the employer’s
    service and consistently with his/her contractual obligations”; J.M.
    Lutz, Les programmes d’ordinateur, p. 45s.

[^1103]: Barrelet / Egloff, Le nouveau droit d’auteur, 17 No. 6 ; R.
    Wyler, Droit du travail, Berne 2008, p. 3810-1.

[^1104]: The theory of purpose (théorie de la finalité) rests upon the
    purpose of the contract and assumes that, in case of doubt, the
    transfer of rights intended by the parties extends only to the
    rights that are necessary to achieve that purpose; K. Troller,
    Manuel du droit Suisse des biens immatériels, vol. II, Bâle 1996, p.
    695; Sic! 1997, p. 382.

[^1105]: § 101 of the Copyright Act of 1976, Pub. L. 94-553, 90 Stat.
    2541, as amended through July 1, 2005.

[^1106]: J.M. Lutz, Les programmes d’ordinateur, p. 187.

[^1107]: Section 10, paragraph 1 SCA : “The author has the right to
    decide if, when and how his/her work shall be used”.

[^1108]: Pursuant to Section 10, paragraph 2 SCA, the exclusive right to
    use the work includes but is not limited to the right to make copies
    of the work, the right to distribute the copies, the right to make
    the work available to the public (…).

[^1109]: C. Gasser, Der Eigengebrauch im Urheberrecht, p. 39.

[^1110]: Barrelet / Egloff, Le nouveau droit d’auteur, 10 No. 16; R.
    Hilty, Sic ! 1997, p. 134 ; E. Neff/ M. Arn, Urheberrechtlicher
    Schutz der Software, in : R. von Büren / L. David (ed.),
    Schweizeriches Immaterialgüter- und Wettbewerbsrecht, vol. II/2,
    Basel 1998, p. 230ss.

[^1111]: Section 10, paragraph 3 SCA.

[^1112]: Section 12, paragraph 2 SCA.

[^1113]: The Swiss legislator decided to include this additional right
    to harmonize its legislation with the European Directive on the
    legal protection of computer programs, in particular its Section 4.

[^1114]: See Section 13 SCA.

[^1115]: J.M. Lutz, Les programmes d’ordinateurs. p. 189.

[^1116]: Concerning most works protected by copyright, the owner of a
    copy of the work will only enjoy the work, i.e. read a book, listen
    to a record or watch a movie, but with computer software, the
    legislator wanted to protect a professional use of the protected
    work.

[^1117]: Ordinance on copyright and neighboring rights (CRO) from April
    26, 1993 and last revised on July 1, 2008, RS 231.11 ; Barrelet /
    Egloff, Le nouveau droit d’auteur, 12 No.13.

[^1118]: Section 19, paragraph 4 SCA ; Barrelet / Egloff, Le nouveau
    droit d’auteur, 19 No. 29.

[^1119]: Section 9 SCA : “The author has the exclusive right on his/her
    work and the right to be credited as the author”.

[^1120]: Section 11 SCA : “The author has the exclusive right to decide
    : (a) if, when and how his/her work can be modified ; (b) if, when
    and how his/her work can be used for the creation of a derivative or
    a collective work.”

[^1121]: Case “Baupläne”, Sic ! 2004, p. 299.

[^1122]: R. Wyler, Droit du travail, Berne 2008, p. 381 ; V. Salvadé, La
    protection du support multimédia au regard du droit d’auteur, in SJ
    1996, p. 265.

[^1123]: V. Salvadé, op. cit., p. 265.

[^1124]: G. Fröhlich-Bleuler, Pratique Juridique Actuelle (AJP/PJA)
    1995, p. 578.

[^1125]: Section 24, paragraph 2 SCA.

[^1126]: G. Fröhlich-Bleuler, PJA 1995, p. 573.

[^1127]: Section 24a SCA.

[^1128]: Section 29, paragraph 2, lit. a SCA ; see also J-M Lutz, Les
    programmes d’ordinateurs, p. 201.

[^1129]: Section 30, paragraph 1, lit. a SCA.

[^1130]: Section 30, paragraph 2 SCA.

[^1131]: Barrelet / Egloff, Le nouveau droit d’auteur, 30 No. 5.

[^1132]: WIPO Copyright Treaty of December 20, 1996, RS 0.231.151.

[^1133]: WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty of December 20, 1996,
    RS 0.231.171.1.

[^1134]: See Section 11 WCT and 18 WPPT ; See also the Message of the
    Federal Council for the adoption of the two WIPO treaties and the
    modification of Swiss copyright law, FF 2006, p. 3297.

[^1135]: M. Jaccard/ J. Heumann, Commentaire romand Propriété
    Intellectuelle, Lausanne 2013, LDA 39a N 25 ff.

[^1136]: See Section 62, paragraph 1bis SCA ; FF 2006, p. 3297.

[^1137]: For a definition of Open Source, please see the “Open Source
    Definition” by the Open Source Initiative (OSI).

[^1138]: Barrelet / Egloff, Le nouveau droit d’auteur, 7 No. 4.

[^1139]: See I.3 (b) above; G. Fröhlich-Bleuler, Uhreber- und
    vertragsrechtliche Aspekte der Open Source Software, in Jörg /
    Arter, IT-Verträge, Bern 2007, p. 194.

[^1140]: Section 7, Paragraph 2 SCA ; M.J. Widmer, Open Source
    Software — Urheberrechtliche Aspekte freier Software, p. 81.

[^1141]: E. Moglen, Why FSF Gets Copyright Assignment From Contributors,
    <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/whyassign.Html> ; O. Johnny, M. Miller,
    M. Webbink, Copyright in Open Source Software — Understanding the
    Boundaries, IFOSS Law Review, Vol. 2, Issue 1.

[^1142]: Section 7, Paragraph 3 SCA.

[^1143]: G. Fröhlich-Bleuler, op. cit., p. 194.

[^1144]: See for instance the Apple Public Source License 2.0 or the
    LaTex Project Public License (LPPL)
    (<http://www.opensource.org/licenses/category>).

[^1145]: Section 17 SCA ; G. Frohlich-Bleuler, op. cit. p. 195.

[^1146]: Section 11, Paragraph 2 SCA.

[^1147]: M.J. Widmer, Open Source Software, p. 134 ; some Swiss authors
    even deny that any modification of computer software could ever
    infringe upon the author’s moral rights.

[^1148]: Section 5 GPL v3 : “The work must carry prominent notices
    stating that you modified it, and giving a relevant date” ; Section
    2 GPL v2 : “You must cause the modified files to carry prominent
    notices stating that you changed the files and the date of any
    change”.

[^1149]: A. Metzger & T. Jaeger, Open Source Software and German
    Copyright law, IIC 2001 Heft 01, p.65-6.

[^1150]: G. Fröhlich-Bleurer, op. cit. p. 184.

[^1151]: Section 1 of the Swiss Code of Obligations (SCO).

[^1152]: A. Cherpillod Giacobino, Internet dans la conclusion du contrat
    et les solutions de paiement, in SJ 2003 II p. 405.

[^1153]: On that matter, see also Section 9 of the GNU GPL v3 that
    states that “You are not required to accept this license in order to
    receive or run a copy of the Program”.

[^1154]: G. Fröhlich-Bleuler, op. cit. p. 188-9.

[^1155]: Section 1, paragraph 2 Swiss Code of Obligations (SCO) : “This
    manifestation can be express or implied” ; for a complete
    discussion, see M. Jaccard, La conclusion de contrats par
    ordinateur — Aspects juridiques de l'échange de données
    informatisées (EDI), ASR, Berne 1996.

[^1156]: Under Swiss law, the expression of the party’s intent can
    result from concrete actions that reveal its intent to be bound by
    the submitted offer ; P. Engel, Traité des obligations en droit
    Suisse, Berne 1997, p. 130; ATF 123 III 53 JdT 1999 I 179.

[^1157]: G. Fröhlich-Bleuler, op. cit. p. 221-2.

[^1158]: See Section 10 GNU GPL v3 : “Each time you convey a covered
    work, the recipient automatically receives a license from the
    original licensors, to run, modify and propagate that work, subject
    to this License” or Section 6 of the GNU GPL v2 : “Each time you
    redistribute the Program (or any work based on the Program), the
    recipient automatically receives a license from the original
    licensor to copy, distribute or modify the Program subject to these
    terms and conditions”.

[^1159]: See Section 64 SCA. A unified civil procedure act will come
    into force on January 1st, 2011 and replace the 27 civil procedure
    codes currently in force within the country ; this legal
    modification will however not affect the system of one unique
    competent jurisdiction as regards to copyright which will remain
    into place.

[^1160]: M.J. Widmer, Open Source Software, p. 106-7.

[^1161]: Section 97 and 107-109 SCO.

[^1162]: Section 61 SCA.

[^1163]: Section 62 SCA.

[^1164]: Section 67 SCA makes it a criminal offence to perform the
    following actions without right : (1) use a work under a false
    designation, (2) disclose a work, (3) modify a work, (4) use a work
    for the purpose of creating a derivative work, (5)make copies of a
    work, (6) offers the work to the public or distribute it by any
    other means, publicly represent or perform a work, broadcast the
    work (…) rent a software.

[^1165]: P. Engel, Traité des obligations en droit suisse, Berne 1997,
    p. 175.

[^1166]: ATF 96 II 154, ad p. 156 ; P. Engel, Contrats de droit suisse,
    Berne 2000, p. 774.

[^1167]: K. Troller, Manuel du droit suisse des biens immatériels, p.
    722.

[^1168]: Open Source Definition, Section 1 : “The license shall not
    restrict any party from selling or giving away the software as a
    component of an aggregate software distribution containing programs
    from several different sources. The license shall not require a
    royalty or other fee for such sale”.

[^1169]: U. Widmer, Gutachten betreffend Rechtsfragen bei Beschaffung
    und Einsatz offener Software in des Schweizerisches Bundesverwaltung
    (Projekt OPUS), p. 54.

[^1170]: See Section 239 SCO.

[^1171]: M.J. Widmer, Open Source Software, p. 181.

[^1172]: See for example Section 16 GNU GPL v3 : “In no event unless
    required by applicable law or agreed to in writing will any
    copyright holder ?…? be liable to you for damages ?…?”.

[^1173]: See Section 100 SCO ; W. Straub, Informatik Recht : Einführung
    in Softwareschutz, Projektverträge und Haftung; U. Widmer, Projekt
    OPUS, p. 54.

[^1174]: M.J. Widmer, Open Source Software, p. 182.

[^1175]: G. Fröhlich-Bleuler, op. cit. p. 207.

[^1176]: On that issue, a list of all FOSS licenses compatible with the
    GPL has been published here :
    <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/license-list.html#GPLCompatibleLicenses>.

[^1177]: See G. Fröhlich-Bleuler, Die neue Version des GNU Public
    License, in Jusletter 21. Juli 2008.

[^1178]: ATF 122 III 463.

[^1179]: K. Troller, Manuel du droit suisse des biens immatériels,
    p.1043.

[^1180]: ATF 63 II 277, ad. p. 280.

[^1181]: K. Troller, Manuel du droit suisse des biens immatériels,
    p.1046; Y. Benhamou, Dommages-intérêts suite à la violation de
    droits de propriété intellectuelle, Genève 2013, p.125 ff.

[^1182]: ATF 81 II 534, JdT 1956 I 269 ; Section 106 of the new unified
    Civil Procedure Act (CPA).

[^1183]: Case from the Federal Administrative Court (FAC) of July 2,
    2009, N B-3402/2009 and case from the Swiss Federal Court of March
    11, 2011 No. 2C\_783/2010.

[^1184]: B. Dutoit, Droit international privé suisse, Bâle 2005, 4e
    édition, p. 348.

[^1185]: Section 2 and 5 of the Lugano Convention on jurisdiction and
    the enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters, RS
    0.275.11.

[^1186]: Section 116 PILA ; K. Troller, Manuel du droit suisse des biens
    immatériels, p. 1209.

[^1187]: Section 122, paragraph 2 PILA.

[^1188]: B. Dutoit, Droit international privé suisse, Bâle 2005, 4e
    édition, p. 428.

[^1189]: Section 110, paragraph 2 PILA.

[^1190]: B. Dutoit, Droit international privé suisse, Bâle 2005, 4e
    édition, p. 355.

[^1191]: Section 64 SCA and Section 5 CPA.

[^1192]: Section 74 of the Federal Act on the Swiss Supreme Court.

[^1193]: Section 65 SCA ; Decision from the Aargau court from June 5,
    2007 in Sic ! 2008, p. 24.

[^1194]: Barrelet / Egloff, Le nouveau droit d’auteur, 65 No. 5.

[^1195]: Section 67, 69 and 69a SCA ; Barrelet / Egloff, Le nouveau
    droit d’auteur, 67 No. 1ss.

[^1196]: Taiwan Copyright Act, Art. 5(1)(j), 22(2)(3), 59, 60, 80-2, and
    87.The official translations in English can be reached by “Laws &
    Regulations Database of The Republic of China” at:
    <http://law.moj.gov.tw/Eng/LawClass/LawAll.aspx?PCode=J0070017>

[^1197]: The official translations of the Taiwan Civil Code in English
    can be reached by “Laws & Regulations Database of The Republic of
    China” at:
    <http://law.moj.gov.tw/Eng/LawClass/LawAll.aspx?PCode=B0000001>

[^1198]: The official translations of the Taiwan Consumer Protection Law
    in English can be reached by “Laws & Regulations Database of The
    Republic of China” at:
    <http://law.moj.gov.tw/Eng/LawClass/LawAll.aspx?PCode=J0170001>

[^1199]: The official translations of the Taiwan Regulations of
    Copyright Dispute Mediation in English can be reached by “Laws &
    Regulations Database of The Republic of China” at:
    <http://law.moj.gov.tw/Eng/LawClass/LawAll.aspx?PCode=J0070020>

[^1200]: The official translations of the Taiwan Intellectual Property
    Case Adjudication Act in English can be reached by “Laws &
    Regulations Database of The Republic of China” at:
    <http://law.moj.gov.tw/Eng/LawClass/LawAll.aspx?PCode=A0030215>

[^1201]: The official translations of the Taiwan Code of Civil Procedure
    in English can be reached by “Laws & Regulations Database of The
    Republic of China” at:
    <http://law.moj.gov.tw/Eng/LawClass/LawAll.aspx?PCode=B0010001>

[^1202]: The official translations of the Taiwan Code of Criminal
    Procedure in English can be reached by “Laws & Regulations Database
    of The Republic of China” at:
    <http://law.moj.gov.tw/Eng/LawClass/LawAll.aspx?PCode=C0010001>

[^1203]: The court shall review the written mediation settlement
    statement with due dispatch. Unless it is contrary to act or
    regulation, public order, or good morals, or compulsory execution
    would be impossible, judge shall sign copies thereof and affix the
    seal of the court thereto.

[^1204]: Take the verdict documented as “Intellectual Property Related
    Criminal Appealing Litigation Number 41 by Intellectual Property
    Court in 2008.” For example, judges of the trial bench made a clear
    statement in their court judgment about legal opinions for not
    applying sweat of the brow doctrine directly in copyright area
    without proper and sufficient expression about minimum originality
    requirement.

[^1205]: Cited from the “Copyright Related Explanation Letter Number
    8118200 by Ministry of the Interior of 2 Oct. 1992.”

[^1206]: Cited from the speech given by Clay Shirky, How the Internet
    will (one day) transform government at TED:
    <http://www.ted.com/talks/clay_shirky_how_the_internet_will_one_day_transform_government.html>

[^1207]: If there is no applicable act for a civil case, the case shall
    be decided according to customs. If there is no such custom, the
    case shall be decided according to the jurisprudence.

[^1208]: The official translations of the Taiwan Trust Law in English
    can be reached by “Laws & Regulations Database of The Republic of
    China” at:
    <http://law.moj.gov.tw/Eng/LawClass/LawAll.aspx?PCode=I0020024>

[^1209]: The official translations of the Taiwan Electronic Signatures
    Act in English can be reached by “Laws & Regulations Database of The
    Republic of China” at:
    <http://law.moj.gov.tw/Eng/LawClass/LawAll.aspx?PCode=J0080037>

[^1210]: The official translations of the Taiwan Copyright Collective
    Management Organization Act in English can be reached by “Laws &
    Regulations Database of The Republic of China” at:
    <http://law.moj.gov.tw/Eng/LawClass/LawAll.aspx?PCode=J0070019>

[^1211]: However, the patent sublicense is expressly declared and
    provided in the GPL-3.0, LGPL-3.0, and AGPL-3.0, such a mechanism is
    currently seldom to be observed in other FOSS licenses.

[^1212]: If any portion of this section is held invalid or unenforceable
    under any particular circumstance, the balance of the section is
    intended to apply and the section as a whole is intended to apply in
    other circumstances.

[^1213]: GPL-2.0, GPL-3.0, LGPL-2.1, LGPL-3.0, AGPL-3.0.

[^1214]: Chyan Yang, Hsien-Jyh Liao, and Chung-Chen Chen, “Analysis on
    GPL in terms of the legal system in Taiwan” at:
    [http://ccckmit.wdfiles.com/local—files/re%3Apaper/GPL.pdf](http://ccckmit.wdfiles.com/local—files/re%3Apaper/GPL.pdf)

[^1215]: The continued existence of Scots law as a separate system was
    guaranteed by the Act of Union of 1707, which united the previously
    separate nations of Scotland and of England. The historical roots of
    Scots law lie in an admixture of a Roman-Dutch system (generations
    of mediaeval Scottish law students studied at Leyden University)
    with a substantial common law overlay. As a result, in some areas,
    the laws of Scotland and of England can be substantially different.
    By contrast the laws of England and of Northern Ireland share a
    common heritage, and are substantially similar, though some minor
    differences can occur.

[^1216]: The United Kingdom consists of England, Wales, Scotland and
    Northern Ireland, and three distinct legal jurisdictions: England
    and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland. The law in effect in
    England and Wales is called “English law” throughout England and
    Wales, never “Welsh Law” even when it applies in Wales (by analogy,
    Australians speak English, not Australian). The United Kingdom
    Parliament has devolved both executive and legislative powers in
    certain areas to the devolved parliaments (which are
    constitutionally not sovereign parliaments but statutory bodies) in
    Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. Executive and legislative
    powers in respect of those matters which have not been devolved
    (which, since there is no English parliament means, in respect of
    England, everything) are exercised by the United Kingdom parliament,
    which also has powers also to legislate directly in respect even of
    devolved matters (but does not normally do so.) Much legislation
    passed by the United Kingdom parliament is expressed to cover all
    three jurisdictions of the United Kingdom, but the legislation
    itself will then take account of differences of terminology and
    procedure within the different jurisdictions. Proposals for a
    separate Welsh jurisdiction, which was the subject of consultation
    in 2012, have been shelved as of September 2013. The Isle of Man and
    the Channel Islands are neither parts of the United Kingdom nor of
    the European Union, and have their own legal systems and laws. They
    are not covered by this Chapter.

[^1217]: An Act for the Encouragement of Learning, by vesting the Copies
    of Printed Books in the Authors or purchasers of such Copies during
    the Timed therein mentioned (8 Anne c 19)

[^1218]: <http://www.opsi.gov.uk/acts/acts1988/ukpga_19880048_en_1.htm>

[^1219]: 1992 SI 3233

[^1220]: Re-enacted as 2009/24/EC

[^1221]: Defined by the Copyright Act, s. 178 as “…emptygenerated by
    computer in circumstances such that there is no human author of the
    work”

[^1222]: Copyright Act s. 9(3)

[^1223]: Copyright Act s 11(2)

[^1224]: The courts will occasionally intervene to correct manifest
    injustice: for example, Griggs and Others v. Evans and Others (2005)
    EWCA (Civ) 11, and Destra Software Ltd v Comada (UK) LLP and others
    (2013) EWHC 1575 (Pat), 11 June 2013 but cases like this are unusual

[^1225]: One the one hand, it is arguable that the output of a program
    (e.g. on a screen) is a separate and independent copyright work,
    created by running the instructions contained in the program. On the
    other hand, running a program is in some sense “performing it” as is
    following the stage directions in a play. These distinctions are
    fairly academic, since in either case, the program will undoubtedly
    be copied in the act of running it.

[^1226]: Copyright Act, Sections 50A,B,C

[^1227]: Copyright Act, Section 50C(1)

[^1228]: Copyright Act, Section 50C(2)

[^1229]: Copyright Act, Section 50A

[^1230]: Copyright Act, Section 50BA

[^1231]: Copyright Act, Section 50B

[^1232]: Copyright Act, Sections 79 and 80

[^1233]: Copyright Act, Section 12 (2)

[^1234]: Copyright Act, Section 12

[^1235]: Copyright Act, Section 12 (8)

[^1236]: The term used in England and Northern Ireland is “Assignment”
    and the term used in Scotland is “Assignation”. The difference is
    entirely one of terminology and not of substance. The substance is
    the same in all jurisdictions, even to the extent that a Scottish
    Court would probably recognise a document operative under Scots Law
    and mislabelled as an assignment instead of an assignation, and, in
    respect of the courts of the other two jurisdictions, the converse
    would probably also hold true. The word “assignment” is the only
    word used in the Copyright Act, but the interpretation section
    (section 177) defines “assignment” so as to include assignation.

[^1237]: Copyright Act, Section 90(3)

[^1238]: It does not necessarily follow that the document requires to be
    written on paper nor that the signature cannot be an electronic one,
    but a detailed discussion of this topic lies outwith the scope of
    the present work.

[^1239]: Section 90(2)

[^1240]: Section 91

[^1241]: Section 90(1)

[^1242]: Section 296(6)

[^1243]: Section 296ZF

[^1244]: Section 296

[^1245]: Section 296ZA

[^1246]: Section 296ZA (2)

[^1247]: Section 296ZG

[^1248]: Section 296ZD

[^1249]: In Scotland “defender”

[^1250]: Section 107(1)

[^1251]: Section 107(1)(e)

[^1252]: Section 107(2)

[^1253]: Section 107 (2A)

[^1254]: R v Vickerman 2012 unreported

[^1255]: Section 296ZB

[^1256]: Sections 99, 100 and for example 296(4)

[^1257]: <http://customs.hmrc.gov.uk/channelsPortalWebApp/downloadFile?contentID=HMCE_CL_000244>

[^1258]: Scots law, following Roman law recognises the binding legal
    effect of a unilteral promise without further formality, and, in any
    event there are no such things as Deed Polls in Scots Law.

[^1259]: Personal bar is the equivalent principle in Scotland to
    estoppel in England.

[^1260]: *Central London Property Trust Ltd v High Trees House Ltd*
    (1947) KB 130

[^1261]: It is worth pointing out that neither joint ownership nor
    common ownership of itself creates a trust so the mere fact that
    property in one thing is held by a number of owners does not
    automatically mean that they are Trustees.

[^1262]: “Derivative work” has no statutory definition in UK law, and is
    used in this chapter as shorthand for “a work based on a
    pre-existing work to the extent that exploitation of the new work
    will require the licence of the owner of the pre-existing work”. An
    adaptation (as defined in Section 21) will be a derivative work
    within this definition.

[^1263]: OSD Clause 5.

[^1264]: OSD Clause 6. Bruce Perens indicates, e.g., that an author of
    FOSS cannot provide a clause that prohibits the use of the software
    by regimes such as the former South African apartheids regime (B.,
    PERENS, “The FOSS Definition”, <http://perens.com/OSD.html>).

[^1265]: Sections 79 and 80

[^1266]: For judicial discussion of this point in the United States, see
    *Jacobsen v. Katzer*
    \[<http://www.cafc.uscourts.gov/opinions/08-1001.pdf>

[^1267]: There is no case in Scotland directly dealing with FOSS
    licences, but there is a useful (albeit *obiter dicta*) analysis in
    a case concerning proprietary software: *Profile Software Ltd v.
    Becogent Ltd (2005) ScotCS CSOH\_28 (16 February 2005)*. The same
    principles will apply to FOSS licences.

[^1268]: GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE (GPL) version 3, article 10,
    [http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html.\]&\#8221](http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html.</simpara></footnote>&#8221);
    and GPL version 2: “each time you redistribute the Program (or any
    work based on the Program), the recipient automatically receives a
    license from the original licensor”[^1444].

    In this way the user of the software obtains a license from all
    authors in the tree.

    Users of GPL programs (such as the Linux kernel) may, therefore, be
    operating under a large number of parallel licences, each granted by
    an individual author of the underlying work.

    Licences such as the MIT and BSD do not contain such explicit
    wording, and it is probably easiest to consider that the right
    granted to the licensee includes the right to sub-license, so the
    end-user is receiving a single licence to the software from his or
    her immediate licensor, which, in respect of the parts of the work
    of which the licensor is not the owner, are sub-licensed to the
    licensee by the licensor. There are no judicial interpretations of
    this issue under English or Scots law, and it is not clear what the
    effect may be. However, one consequence may be that under English
    Law, if a licensor successfully argues that he can withdraw a bare
    licence on notice (and the doctrine of promissory estoppel is found
    inapplicable)[^1445], then a licensee under a sub-licence (which was
    granted when the original licence was still in force) will be better
    protected against withdrawal than a licensee receiving a number of
    parallel licences, one of which is withdrawn. It is also the case
    that if (as discussed below) a licensee has a claim against the
    licensor for a defect in the software, that the licensor will be
    better protected in circumstances where there is a large number of
    parallel licences, as opposed to their being one licence between the
    licensor and the licensee.

[^1269]: OSD Clause 10.

[^1270]: Insolvency Act 1986

[^1271]: Or, in Scotland, delict or negligence.

[^1272]: *Caparo Industries plc v Dickman* (1990) 2 AC 605

[^1273]: See e.g., the BSD license
    (<http://www.opensource.org/licenses/bsd-license>): “THIS SOFTWARE
    IS PROVIDED BY &lt;copyright holder&gt; **AS IS** AND ANY EXPRESS OR
    IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
    WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
    ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL &lt;copyright holder&gt; BE LIABLE
    FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
    CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
    SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR
    BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF
    LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING
    NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS
    SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.”

[^1274]: B., PERENS, “The Open Source Definition”, *Open Sources: Voices
    from the Open Source Revolution*, <http://perens.com/OSD.html>.

[^1275]: See e.g., M., OLSON, “Dual Licensing”, in *Open Sources 2.0:
    The Continuing Evolution* (Ed. C., DiBona, D., Cooper and M.,
    Stone), O’Reilly, 2006, p. 35.

[^1276]: The GNU General Public License expressly allows this (GPL v. 2,
    art. 11; GPL v. 3, art. 7).

[^1277]: An outcome which may be more likely in Scotland than in England

[^1278]: <http://www.bis.gov.uk/files/file22866.pdf>

[^1279]: Consumer Protection Act 1987 Section 4(c)

[^1280]: Neither the principles (freedoms) of the Free Software
    movement, nor the Open Source Definition mandate the copyleft
    clause. Many FOSS licenses do not contain a copyleft clause.
    Examples are the Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD) license and
    the Academic Free License.

[^1281]: E.g., GPL version 3 Art. 5 stipulates: “You must license the
    entire work, as a whole, under this License to anyone who comes into
    possession of a copy. This License will therefore apply, along with
    any applicable section 7 additional terms, to the whole of the work,
    and all its parts, regardless of how they are packaged. This License
    gives no permission to license the work in any other way, but it
    does not invalidate such permission if you have separately received
    it.” GPL version 2 Art. 2 b stipulates: “You must cause any work
    that you distribute or publish, that in whole or in part contains or
    is derived from the Program or any part thereof, to be licensed as a
    whole at no charge to all third parties under the terms of this
    License”.

[^1282]: It has been argued that some licences, for example the GPL, try
    to impose obligations which impose on works which are connected with
    the relevant work in a way which is more remote than a derivative
    work: for example, through linking. This issue is beyond the scope
    of this chapter.

[^1283]: The European Union Public Licence, for example, permits
    re-licensing under the GPL instead of its own terms.

[^1284]: For example, an action to enforce a promise of marriage

[^1285]: Such as a contract to grant a lease of land which the party
    does not own; or to sell the Forth Bridge — at any rate by anyone
    other than Network Rail

[^1286]: For example, against a foreigner who is furth (i.e. out) of the
    jurisdiction and who would not be available to have sanctions, such
    as imprisonment for contempt of court, enforced against him.

[^1287]: It does not follow logically that the capital value of piece of
    software is diminished by an amount equal to the cost of a
    proprietary licence each time the software is distributed in
    infringement of that licence, but courts have been persuaded to
    award damages on this basis, ignoring the stricter “diminution in
    value” rule.

[^1288]: *American Cyanamid -v- Ethicon Ltd.* (1975) RPC 513

[^1289]: Formerly known as an Anton Piller order after *Anton Piller KG*
    v *Manufacturing Processes Ltd* (1976) Ch.55

[^1290]: Not to be confused with the Supreme Court of the United
    Kingdom, to which an appeal lies from the Inner House of the Court
    of Session).

[^1291]: Petition procedure is not likely to be applicable in a typical
    intellectual property case

[^1292]: The proper name for Court of Session judges.

[^1293]: “Barristers” is the name given to Advocates in England

[^1294]: More properly, a Solicitor having rights of audience in the
    Court of Session

[^1295]: “(Congress shall have the power…) To promote the Progress of
    Science and useful Arts, by securing for limited Times to Authors
    and Inventors the exclusive Right to their respective Writings and
    Discoveries.”

[^1296]: 17 U.S. Code may be found at
    <http://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/html/uscode17/usc_sup_01_17.html>.

[^1297]: 35 U.S. Code may be found at
    <http://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/html/uscode35/usc_sup_01_35.html>.

[^1298]: 15 U.S. Code Chapter 22 may be found at
    <http://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/15/usc_sup_01_15_10_22.html>.

[^1299]: For example, the Uniform Trade Secrets Act as embodied in
    California state law may be found at
    <http://www.leginfo.ca.gov/cgi-bin/displaycode?section=civ&group=03001-04000&file=3426-3426.11>.

[^1300]: The Economic Espionage Act of 1996 found at 18 U.S. Code
    §§1831-1839, <http://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/18/1831.html>.

[^1301]: World Intellectual Property Copyright Treaty of 1996 found at
    <http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/wct/trtdocs_wo033.html#P45_2379>.

[^1302]: The final report of the National Commission on New
    Technological Uses of Copyrighted Works found at
    <http://digital-law-online.info/CONTU/contu1.html>.

[^1303]: The U.S. Copyright Act of 1976 found at
    <http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Copyright_Act_of_1976>.

[^1304]: Public Law 96-517 found at
    <http://law.copyrightdata.com/amendments.php>.

[^1305]: 17 U.S.C. §102(a).

[^1306]: 17 U.S.C. §411(a).

[^1307]: 17 U.S. Code §102(a).

[^1308]: 17 U.S. Code §201(a).

[^1309]: 17 U.S. Code §201(b).

[^1310]: *Id.*

[^1311]: 17 U.S. Code §101.

[^1312]: 17 U.S. Code §204.

[^1313]: 17 U.S. Code §201(a).

[^1314]: 17 U.S. Code §101.

[^1315]: 1-6 Melville B. Nimmer, Nimmer on Copyright §6.03. Nimmer is
    only available in hard copy from LexisNexis or in electronic form
    from either the LexisNexis or Westlaw legal research services.
    Nimmer is widely considered the authoritative treatise on U.S.
    copyright law.

[^1316]: *Id.*

[^1317]: *See, Id.*

[^1318]: 1-6 Nimmer §§6.02, 6.03.

[^1319]: *Id.*

[^1320]: 1-6 Nimmer §6.03.

[^1321]: 17 U.S.C. §201(a).

[^1322]: 1-6 Nimmer §6.06(A).

[^1323]: *Id.*

[^1324]: *Id.*

[^1325]: 17 U.S.C. §103(a).

[^1326]: 17 U.S.C. §101.

[^1327]: 1-3 Nimmer § 3.03(A) (citing Feist Publications, Inc. v. Rural
    Tel. Serv. Co., 499 U.S. 340, 348, 111 S. Ct. 1282, 113 L. Ed. 2d
    358 (1991); Siegel v. Time Warner Inc., 496 F. Supp. 2d 1111, 1151
    (C.D. Cal. 2007); Sherry Mfg. Co. v. Towel King of Fla., Inc., 753
    F.2d 1565 (11th Cir. 1985); Montgomery v. Noga, 168 F.3d 1282, 1290
    n.12 (11th Cir. 1999); Moore Pub., Inc. v. Big Sky Mktg., Inc., 756
    F. Supp. 1371, 1374, 1378 (D. Idaho 1990)).

[^1328]: Lothar Determan, *Dangerous Liaisons — Software Combinations as
    Derivative Works? Distribution, Installation, and Execution of
    Linked Programs Under Copyright Law, Commercial Licenses, and the
    GPL*, 21 Berkeley Tech. L. J. 1421, 1430 (2006).

[^1329]: *Id.*

[^1330]: 1-6 Nimmer, §6.05.

[^1331]: 17 U.S.C. §103(a).

[^1332]: *Id.*

[^1333]: 1-3 Nimmer §3.02.

[^1334]: *Id.*

[^1335]: 17 U.S.C.§ 101.

[^1336]: 1-3 Nimmer § 3.03(A) (citing Feist Publications, Inc. v. Rural
    Tel. Serv. Co., 499 U.S. 340, 348, 111 S. Ct. 1282, 113 L. Ed. 2d
    358 (1991); Siegel v. Time Warner Inc., 496 F. Supp. 2d 1111, 1151
    (C.D. Cal. 2007); Sherry Mfg. Co. v. Towel King of Fla., Inc., 753
    F.2d 1565 (11th Cir. 1985); Montgomery v. Noga, 168 F.3d 1282, 1290
    n.12 (11th Cir. 1999); Moore Pub., Inc. v. Big Sky Mktg., Inc., 756
    F. Supp. 1371, 1374, 1378 (D. Idaho 1990)).

[^1337]: 17 U.S.C. §201(c).

[^1338]: 1-6 Nimmer §6.05.

[^1339]: *Id.*

[^1340]: *Id.*

[^1341]: *Id.*

[^1342]: *Id.*

[^1343]: *Id.*

[^1344]: 17 U.S.C. §106.

[^1345]: *Id.*

[^1346]: 17 U.S.C. §109(a).

[^1347]: 2-8 Nimmer §8.12.

[^1348]: Computer Assoc., 982 F.2d at 714.

[^1349]: *See*, 4-13 Nimmer §13.02(B).

[^1350]: *See*, Computer Assoc., 982 F.2d at 715.

[^1351]: *Id.*

[^1352]: Apple Computer, Inc v. Microsoft Corp., 35 F.3d 1435, 1445 (9th
    Cir. 1994).

[^1353]: *See*, Lotus Dev. Corp. v. Borland Int’l, 49 F.3d 807, 819 (1st
    Cir. 1995).

[^1354]: *See, Id.* at 815.

[^1355]: 4-13 Nimmer §13.03(F).

[^1356]: *See,* Order Re Copyrightability Of Certain Replicated Elements
    Of The Java Application Programming Interface (hereinafter *Order*)
    found at <http://www.groklaw.net/pdf3/OraGoogle-1202.pdf>.

[^1357]: 17 U.S.C. §102(b).

[^1358]: 1-2 Nimmer §2.02.

[^1359]: 4-13 Nimmer §13.03(B)(2)(a).

[^1360]: Computer Assoc., 982 F.2d at 708.

[^1361]: *See,* BUC Int’l Corp. v. Int’l Yacht Council Ltd., 489 F.3d
    1129, 1143 (11th Cir. 2007).

[^1362]: *See*, 4-13 Nimmer §13.03(B)(3).

[^1363]: *See*, 4-13 Nimmer §13.03(F)(2).

[^1364]: 4-13 Nimmer §13.03(F)(2).

[^1365]: *See,* Computer Assoc., 982 F.2d at 715.

[^1366]: *See*, Computer Assoc., 982 F.2d at 715.

[^1367]: Order *supra* Note XXX

[^1368]: *See, Id.* at 710.

[^1369]: 4-13 Nimmer §13.03(B)(4).

[^1370]: *Id.*

[^1371]: *See*, John William See v. Christopher Durang and LA. Stage
    Co., 711 F.2d 141, 143 (9th Cir. 1983).

[^1372]: *Id.*

[^1373]: *Id.*

[^1374]: Mist-On Sys. v. Gilley’s European Tan Spa, 303 F. Supp. 2d 974,
    978 (W.D. Wis. 2002).

[^1375]: 4-13 Nimmer §13.03(B)(4).

[^1376]: Mist-On Sys., 303 F. Supp. 2d at 976 (W.D. Wis. 2002)

[^1377]: Computer Assocs., 982 F.2d at 709-10.

[^1378]: BUC Int’l Corp. v. Int’l Yacht Council Ltd., 489 F.3d 1129,
    1143 (11th Cir. 2007).

[^1379]: *See* v. Durang, 711 F.2d at 143.

[^1380]: Computer Assoc., 982 F.2d at 715.

[^1381]: *See*, 1-2 Nimmer §2.03(G).

[^1382]: 17 U.S.C §105.

[^1383]: <http://copyright.gov/help/faq/faq-definitions.html>.

[^1384]: *See, Id.*

[^1385]: *See*, Computer Assocs., 982 F.2d at 710.

[^1386]: <http://www.copyright.gov/help/faq/faq-general.html>.

[^1387]: 4-13 Nimmer §13.03(F)(4).

[^1388]: <http://creativecommons.org/licenses/publicdomain/>.

[^1389]: 17 U.S.C. §102(b).

[^1390]: Feist, 499 U.S. at 350 (1991).

[^1391]: Assessment Techs. of WI, LLC v. WIREdata, Inc., 350 F.3d 640
    (7th Cir. 2003).

[^1392]: 1-3 Nimmer §3.04(B)(3)(a).

[^1393]: 17 U.S.C. § 107.

[^1394]: *Id.*

[^1395]: *Id.*

[^1396]: 17 U.S. Code §117(a).

[^1397]: 17 U.S. Code §117(c).

[^1398]: Visual Artists Rights Act of 1990, 17 U.S. Code §106A.

[^1399]: 17 U.S. Code §302(a).

[^1400]: 17 U.S. Code §302(b).

[^1401]: 17 U.S. Code §302(c).

[^1402]: 17 U.S. Code §201(d)(1).

[^1403]: 17 U.S. Code §201(d)(2).

[^1404]: 17 U.S. Code §204(a).

[^1405]: 17 U.S. Code §205(d).

[^1406]: 17 U.S. Code §205(e).

[^1407]: 17 U.S. Code §203(a)(1-2).

[^1408]: 17 U.S. Code §203(a)(3).

[^1409]: 17 U.S. Code §203(a)(4).

[^1410]: 17 U.S. Code §203(b)(1).

[^1411]: 17 U.S. Code §501(a).

[^1412]: 17 U.S. Code §411.

[^1413]: 17 U.S. Code §412.

[^1414]: 17 U.S. Code §501(b).

[^1415]: *Id.*; Eden Toys, Inc. v. Florelee Undergarment Co., 697 F.2d
    27 (2d Cir. 1982); Random House, Inc. v. Rosetta Books LLC, 150 F.
    Supp. 2d 613, 617 (S.D.N.Y. 2001), aff’d per curiam, 283 F.3d 490
    (2d Cir. 2002)

[^1416]: Eden Toys, 697 F.2d at 32 (1982).

[^1417]: 17 U.S. Code §§502-505.

[^1418]: 28 U.S. Code §1338.

[^1419]: Wooster v. Crane & Co., 147 F. 15 (8th Cir. 1906).

[^1420]: Diamond v. Diehr, 450 U.S. 175 (1981).

[^1421]: In re Bilski, 130 S. Ct. 3218 (2010).

[^1422]: In re Bilski, 130 S. Ct. at 3226 (2010).

[^1423]: 35 U.S.C. §271(a)&(g).

[^1424]: Adams v. Burke, 84 U.S. 453 (1873).

[^1425]: United States v. Univis lens, 316 U.S. 241 (1942).

[^1426]: Intel Corp. v. ULSI System Technology, 995 F.2d 1566 (Fed. Cir.
    1993).

[^1427]: Cyrix Corp. v. Intel Corp., 77 F.3d 1381 (Fed. Cir. 1996).

[^1428]: 35 U.S.C. §154.(a)(2).

[^1429]: America Invents Act, Public Law 112-29 found at
    <http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-112publ29/html/PLAW-112publ29.htm>.

[^1430]: 35 U.S.C. §271(f)(1).

[^1431]: AT&T v. Microsoft, 550 U.S. 437 (2007).

[^1432]: 35 U.S.C. §271(a).

[^1433]: 35 U.S.C. §271(b).

[^1434]: 35 U.S.C. §282.

[^1435]: 35 U.S.C. §§283-285.

[^1436]: 35 U.S.C. §284.

[^1437]: 35 U.S.C. §287.

[^1438]: Magnuson-Moss, 15 U.S.C. §2301 *et seq.*.

[^1439]: 15 Code of Federal Regulations §742.15.

[^1440]: Jacobsen v. Katzer, 535 F.3d 1373 (Fed. Cir. 2008).

[^1441]: 3-10 Nimmer on Copyright §10.15 .

[^1442]: Wallace v. International Business Machines Corp., 467 F.3d 1104
    (CA 7 2006).

[^1443]: Wallace, 467 F.3d at 1107 (2006).
